So that we can get started.
And, um, and I have here,
um, just reading that we are going
to have three presentations tonight.
The first one is, uh,
Eric Waddell from Main School Management.
The second one will be, uh, Dave Dusi from nasdaq.
Um, and the third will be Jeff Melendez from,
uh, zeal Education Group.
So we're gonna start with Eric.
And, um, there will be an opportunity
at the conclusion of Eric's presentation
for questions from the board, not debate and discussion,
but if you have questions specific,
and if there are any people who come in the audience,
they will have an opportunity to ask questions to.
Without objection, I will have questions from the audience
after each presentation as opposed
to just once at the conclusion.
And then after the three presenters,
and they're welcome to stay
and hear this, then the, um, board will
discuss the, um, proposals.
And if there is an agreement, uh, by at least four members
who feel that they're ready to make a decision,
then we are prepared to move into, uh, a regular meeting.
Um, Stephanie has arranged that,
and it's, that's on the back.
So, um, so we can do that.
And then we would choose an agency.
If people are not ready to make that decision,
then we will postpone it
and we will do it on the 17th
when we have a special budget meeting,
and we'll have a special, uh,
board meeting that night as well.
So let me just, um, let me just take the role Dowling here.
Feller Holman here.
Richardson here, rich. And he, he is coming, but he's late.
Uh, Smith here. Um, Kabisa and Davidon.
Okay. So we're gonna go with main school management.
You're, um, there are hard proposals
to be shared with people.
Uh, Eric is going to do the presentation up on the screen.
It will be on the screen behind us as well,
if people wanna turn their chairs around.
And, um, and it's also on your iPad
because it's on the website.
So go ahead Eric. Thank you.
And thank you for being here. Thanks, Marie.
Thank you so much for inviting me.
Uh, it's a pleasure to be here.
This is a beautiful facility,
and I've never been in your lecture
hall, but it's spectacular.
What a, what a benefit to your, uh, school community.
Um, as Rosemary said, my name is Eric Waal.
I am the, uh, current main School Management Association
and Main School Boards Association Executive director.
Uh, main School Management Association has two executives.
Uh, you may know Eileen King.
Um, she is the other executive in the office.
Uh, I'm fairly new to the association.
I started in, uh, July, replacing the, um, revered,
uh, Steve Bailey, who some of you also may know from, from,
uh, workshops or your, your work within the association.
Uh, prior to that, I was the, uh, uh, superintendent
of schools in Kittery.
And, uh, this is my 37th year in education, all in Maine,
14 years as a high school
principal in two different schools.
And, uh, I was, I started out as a teacher
and, uh, a sup superintendent, principal, superintendent.
And now here I am, uh, working at, uh, at a,
on a larger stage, uh, across the state.
Uh, my work in the association at predominantly is work.
I predominantly work with school boards.
Uh, I do, uh, board, um,
development workshops across the state.
I've done about 10 of them already since, uh,
jumping on board here.
And, um, perhaps at some point I'll have the opportunity
to work with, uh, the South Portland, uh,
school board as well.
Let me tell you, uh, what's in your, uh, materials.
So this, I brought these with me today.
The, uh, these white folders, uh,
you should have one in front of you on the left pocket is,
um, just a welcome, uh, uh, message from me.
Underneath that is a, a, uh, copies
and notes of my, uh, slide deck, if in case you want
to jot down notes as I'm going through that, uh, on the, uh,
right pocket, uh, again, just some materials from our, uh,
office explaining
what our superintendent search services provide.
And then, um, two proposals prepared for you.
Uh, the first is the technical proposal,
and the other is the cost proposal.
All the information that you could possibly need,
uh, are in both of those.
Uh, uh, and, um, ask me questions
or we can, uh,
you can just look in those as well, either one.
But, uh, let me just start with my, with my slide deck.
You're on. Thank you.
So, as I said, main school management is a full, uh,
is a full service, um, um, association statewide,
uh, we serve, we serve, uh, superintendents
and school board members from across the state.
We have over about 17,
a little over 1700 school board members, uh, upwards of 200,
uh, uh, uh, superintendents.
And, uh, it's, as I said, a pleasure to offer, uh,
this service as one of our many services
that we offer our members.
Uh, let's continue.
So the question is, why Main School Management Association
for Superintendent services?
I would say that, uh, we have a, a unparalleled level
of insight into, uh, into Maine, uh,
schools in the Maine superintendency.
Uh, we're very responsive.
We're right here in the state of Maine.
Uh, Eileen and I drive up
and down, uh, from, from a roo stick to York County, uh,
almost on a weekly basis.
We're here, uh, in person to provide you
with the support you need, uh, in, in everything you do, uh,
including the s Your Superintendent search.
Uh, we have a main specific expertise that I think, uh, uh,
gives us a leg up, uh, when it comes to, uh,
providing, uh, this service.
We know, uh, main, we know what main superintendents need,
uh, in order to, um, thrive.
And, uh, we're able to apply that knowledge,
uh, to the search process.
And, and as I said, a depth of understanding
of the main superintendency.
Uh, MSMA navigates the context, uh, every single day.
Uh, so we, we have, um, as I said, a a level
of understanding of the superintendency, uh,
that is unmatched in my opinion,
and that is, uh, translatable into the search process.
Uh, we, we have a deep understanding
of Maine school governance structure.
Uh, we certainly know the legal framework,
and we realize that Maine is a, is a, a local control,
community centered, uh, state.
And so, uh,
SA in Maine have a community centered expectation
for its leaders, which we would be able to, uh, articulate
to, uh, uh, potential candidates
and throughout the search process.
So, um, unpacking that even further, uh,
MSMA provides its superintendents with,
with guidance in the areas of, uh, policy, legislation,
negotiations, finance, human resource management,
and then just the day-to-day school operations, which again,
um, provides us with a, a very unique insight into
what it takes to be a successful
superintendent in the state of Maine.
Our constant proximity to the real challenges
and opportunities facing Maine schools gives us, uh,
as I said, an unparalleled understanding of what it takes
to be successful in the superintendency.
And then that understanding is the,
is then translated into the search process.
MSMA has a proven record of identifying candidates
who can thrive under main expectations.
Uh, in the materials that I
provided with you, there are, uh, list of, uh, searches
that we've conducted in recent years.
Uh, we, we do many searches.
I'm, uh, in the process of, uh, presenting, uh,
to three SA in Maine right now.
Eileen is, um, uh,
is fully engaged in about three other searches,
and we hope to have those wrapped up soon
because we understand that, uh, this is early
and, uh, you know, there are many superintendents who intend
to, um, uh, retire.
And we'll make that announcement sometime in January
or perhaps early February,
and that's when things will really ramp up.
So I'm really pleased that you're, um, knowing
that you're going to be engaged in a search
that you're starting the process, uh, early,
because, um, number one, I think it gives you, um,
you'll have a, a bigger candidate pool perhaps, uh,
at this stage of the process in the school year,
but also to, um, you, you won't be, you won't be competing
for, uh, for, for, um, for our, for our time, uh,
uh, by doing this.
Uh, now MSMA knows Maine,
uh, not in theory, but in practice, as I've said already.
Uh, we reach in our search, in our search service,
we reach far beyond Maine,
although we have a really good, uh,
pulse on Maine su on the main superintendency,
and which superintendents, uh, may be aspiring to either,
um, ascend to the superintendency from an assistant
superintendency, or perhaps they're looking for, uh,
a larger SAU.
And, uh, they're currently thriving in a smaller one.
And that gives us, again, an opportunity to know who those,
uh, potential candidates are here in the state of Maine.
But at the same time, we also cast an, uh,
a wide net nationally through our affiliation
with the National School Boards Association with a SA,
which is the Superintendent's Association.
Both Eileen and I are very active in both
of those national associations.
Uh, we utilize, um, EdWeek as a, as a mechanism to, um,
uh, to, uh, advertise openings through our search services.
Uh, of course, we use online platforms and websites.
Uh, our typical online platforms, uh,
that we use are school springing
and more, uh, more regionally, uh, serving schools,
which is, um, which is a platform that's, uh,
housed right here in Maine.
And then, um, you know, all of our main based associations
that we work so closely with, uh,
main Principals Association Mains, Maine, of course, MSBA,
uh, MSMA, uh, uh, MSSA within our association,
superintendents and School Board Members,
principals Association, uh, curriculum leaders, uh,
special education, uh, all of those, uh, uh, uh,
main based associations that we work
with on a re on a weekly basis will enable us to, um,
to really find, uh, some really talented candidates for you.
Uh, if you decide to go with our, our service, uh, MSMA is
with you every step of the way.
We'll, uh, we will help you, um, um,
assess whether a candidate's leadership philosophy
and skillset align with south,
with South Portland's values and cultures.
And we'll work with you to really refine
and define what those, what those values,
and what that culture is so that we can articulate that
to prospective, uh, candidates
and make sure we're, uh, providing you with, uh, uh,
with candidates that are just right for, for, uh, this,
this, uh, SAU.
And your goal is our goal.
MSMA will, uh, shepherd you through a thoughtful,
transparent, community focused process, uh, leading to
what we hope would be a successful appointment
and a strong long-term, uh, leadership match.
And, and so finally, uh, I think it's important to note
that, uh, really for us, the search is just the beginning
of making, making that connection and, and,
and shepherding you through the process of hiring a, a a,
a permanent superintendent in, uh,
south Portland School Department, uh,
is just the really the first step.
We would, we then provide, um, a, we'll provide
your new superintendent with a colleague,
mentor someone right here in the state of Maine,
a practicing successful superintendent,
preferably within this region,
and, uh, an SAU about the same size as South Portland,
so they have an understanding of what the challenges are
and what, what the expectations might be.
Um, at, at MSMA,
we offer a year long orientation program
for our new superintendents.
And perhaps most valuable is, uh,
our routine check-ins from our, our office, uh,
from our office staff.
So we, uh, we're constantly checking in
with superintendents, uh, e lean more so than me,
because my focus is on, also on school boards
and superintendents.
Uh, but there are superintendents from across the state
that call us on a daily basis.
And, uh, and certainly we would be checking in deliberately
and intentionally with, uh, the superintendent who, uh,
who you all, uh, decide is the best fit
for, um, south Portland.
And so that's, uh, that's really the, the, the thrust
of my presentation here today.
As I said in your materials, uh, there are, uh, two,
uh, important, um, uh, proposals.
The technical proposal really is the, the, it's the soup
to nuts, uh, proposal of what we offer.
And, um, I,
I oftentimes hear people say, well, how long does it take?
How long does it take? And how much does it cost?
Um, unlike other, uh, superintendent services,
we offer an a la carte, uh, option for services.
So there are some, uh, sa
and there are some school boards that prefer
to do some of the work themselves.
And so we, we would simply work with you, uh, and, uh,
and, uh, sort of guide you through those, uh, processes.
There are other SA that tell us, they
or other school boards that say, we don't have the time
or the capacity to do any of this.
We expect you to, uh, to, to just take this and run with it.
And in that case, we'd be happy to do that
and then consult with you
as a school board every step of the way.
Um, the cost would be, if it's a,
what I call a, a soup to nuts, uh, search service, when
what we're doing, if we're doing just about, you know,
everything for you, uh, it's around $8,000.
Uh, but again, uh, we are our, um,
our cost is, uh, is, um,
based on an a la carte, um, proposal.
So you can decide within the cost proposal that I shared
with you, uh, what, what parts that you'll need from us,
and what that estimated cost would be.
Um, and the other question
that I often get is, how long does it take?
And what we say at the association is when we're talking
about a superintendent search, uh,
we say it takes approximately three months from, uh, the,
the time that you decide, uh, to go with the association,
uh, for your, for your search service.
And so, given, if, if you were to ask me,
here we are roughly in the middle of December, not,
not even winter yet, um,
although it does feel like an outside, uh, I would say that,
um, given, given the time, uh,
that there are a couple, uh, uh, couple breaks coming up,
you know, the, a holiday break at the end of December,
and then, uh, traditionally a February break when things,
people tend to travel and, and,
and aren't focused necessarily on this work, uh,
that we would, uh, be looking at about a three,
three month process.
And, uh, I don't think it would be unreasonable to expect,
um, the, uh, school board from South Portland to announce a,
um, a successor superintendent by early to mid, uh, March.
Uh, that that would be a typical goal.
However, one of the very first things that we do as our, uh,
in our technical services is once you decide
who you're going with, if you decide to go
with main School Management Association, is
that we would sit with you, uh, as a board
or perhaps just with, uh, with, uh, Rosemary or, and,
and Adrian as your board leaders and,
and really nail down the timeline, uh,
and then, uh, you know,
and just create that hard and fast timeline and stick to it.
And that would guide us through the whole process.
So this is an opportunity to, uh,
have board members ask questions, uh, of Eric, uh,
and get some more details or some more specifics,
or, uh, just answer some concerns.
So, who has questions to start?
Uh, Ty, uh, board member Smith.
Um, first, thank you. That was great.
Um, I appreciate you coming out tonight.
Um, one of the questions I had, one of the things
that I think is appealing about what you guys do is being
so main specific, and you talked a little bit about the
post-hire process and kind of what you can offer candidates.
Is that included as part of the services
that we're buying now?
Or is there kind of a separate service that,
that we would be expected to kind of, um, you know,
build into the, in addition to the search process?
No, that, that's, that's really inc,
that's really included in your membership to MSMA.
So there, there's no additional, um,
there's no additional cost, uh, Tyler for, uh, for,
for those services, we would assign, uh, a,
a colleague mentor, uh, provide yearlong
or welcome, welcome your successor, uh,
uh, superintendent to our year long orientation program
and, and check in with him.
The, the benefit of us, uh, um, doing the search is
that we would, we would've gotten to know
that superintendent really, really well.
Mm-hmm. And so, uh, whereas, uh, a superintendent who,
uh, we're just getting to know in say,
September may take several months for us to get to know.
So there's an advantage clearly, um, of us having our,
our hands in that process earlier on.
But no, there's no additional cost for those. Okay.
Those are membership member services. Great.
Yeah. Thank you. Certainly.
Uh, member Richardson.
Hi. Hi. Nice to see you. Thank you.
I have a couple of questions kind of all unrelated.
Um, the first one, hopefully should be quick.
Who, um, are you able to share who you're working
with right now on the two searches?
You said there are two open searches that you're working
with right now, what Yeah.
Where those might be in the materials.
Um, but if not, Eileen is currently working with, uh,
five town CSD in, uh, in the den Rockport area, um,
Marna Cook, uh, Belfast.
Uh, I have met, uh, recently with our issue 35.
It looks like I'm gonna be doing that, um, search, uh,
in Elliot and South Berwick.
Um, and we have a, uh,
I have a meeting scheduled in early January with the, um,
with, uh, an a OS up in the Dexter area, more,
more rural area of the state. Okay.
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah.
Um, you mentioned that you have a pulse,
or MSMA has a pulse on the real challenges
and opportunities that, that Maine is facing.
What is that? What are those,
what do you think those are right now?
Yeah. Well, the, they're generally speaking,
and I'm not sure, this may not apply to South Portland,
but there is a, a grave concern across the state, uh,
re related to the school infrastructure, uh, in Maine.
Mm-hmm. There are, uh, our schools are aging mm-hmm.
And are showing their age.
Um, certainly this doesn't appear to be, uh,
the case at South Portland High School,
but maybe, maybe some of your other schools in the
District. Yep, absolutely. It could be
The, the, that's a, that's a major concern.
Um, and, and,
and the school, school funding is consistently a concern
for us, uh, across the state of Maine.
And, um, we support our superintendents through
that process, particularly in, if they're new to, to Maine,
because the governance model in Maine is,
is unique, I believe.
Uh, and that what we hear oftentimes from superintendents
who come to us from other states is
that they're not accustomed to having, uh, they're,
they're more accustomed to having a lot
of the budget building, uh, process done, um,
perhaps at the state level.
And so when they come to Maine, they realize, oh,
I'm in charge of all this.
Uh, what exactly does the DOE do?
Uh, and, uh, we,
and we say, no, the DOE plays an important role,
but, um, Maine, Maine is a local control state.
And so you're responsible for all of those components
of, uh, of it.
Um, we're, and,
and from a legislative perspective, we're focused on, uh,
several other, um, issues.
Um, you know, as I said, uh,
school funding is critical.
We're, we're very, uh, interested in what, uh,
the legislature will do with the report,
um, on school funding.
Uh, the rising cost of special education is a,
is a real big concern, uh, here in the state of Maine.
I, I think it's a concern everywhere, frankly,
but, um, Maine is, at least statistically,
is over identifying students with, with special needs.
And so there's a dramatic cost that comes with that.
So those are some issues that, that we're really focused on,
and ones that we would wanna make sure
that anyone who's coming to Maine to lead in the super
as a superintendent would be, would be aware of.
Thank you. Yeah. Just one last question,
and certainly, um, so, you know, ask
as many questions as you want.
Yeah. Then I won't say that,
but I might, I might take a break.
Yeah, that's alright. I'll get somebody else to do.
That's all right. Um, so I,
I'm sure you know that our community
is richly diverse.
Yeah. And, um, wonderful, beautiful different cultures. Mm.
Um, and that's a really important value
for me as a board member.
Um, I know that I share that, uh, with some, with,
I think all of the, I don't wanna speak for anybody here,
but, um, that's, that's, um, personally also one
of the reasons why I've sort of invested
to stay in this community
and have my children attend South Portland schools.
So, um, you know, I, I am concerned about
a leader, um,
or I want, I shouldn't say concerned, but I want a leader.
Uh, I have a vision of, of a leader that, that, um,
that, that adheres to those values to, and,
and, um, south Portland is, is not like,
I don't think South Portland is like Maine, you know,
I mean, I think, you know, Portland
and South Portland are kind
of this Cumberland County, I should say.
Yeah. You know, we are, um, a more progressive,
uh, population.
Um, and so to me, the, the access
to candidates from all over the country
is really important to me.
Mm-hmm. So, I, you had a slide about that,
that was just pretty high level.
And if you could just talk me through
that a little bit more substantively Sure.
How you are, um, how you are, you know, finding candidates
that, not, not
to say there isn't one amazing one here in Maine, like,
like we have with George, but, yeah.
Um, but, but yeah, I'd love
to hear what you think about that.
Well, as I said, there are, um, you know,
some really industry standard mechanisms to,
to advertise openings across, uh, the country.
Uh, uh, we, we really tap into our connections
with National School Boards Association
and the A A SA, the Superintendents Association.
We're able to really get a lot of exposure that way.
Uh, EdWeek is a, is a popular, um, uh, mechanism
for advertising openings.
And I would say that, uh, school springing is a national,
uh, uh, uh, search platform that, that
probably many of, many of your employees, uh,
used when they were applying for jobs here.
Um, and then, uh,
and then finally the Serving Schools platform, as I said,
is a, is a great one to use as well.
I, I, I, I sort of, it's a, it's a great question.
Um, you know, I sort of think of it as, um,
an analogous to real to, to real estate, you know, in,
in 2025, uh, you don't necessarily need the, the, the,
the National Franchise realtor to get, you know,
to get exposure for your property.
I mean, it's, it, now those are, that's all done through,
um, you know, through a common platform.
And so, uh, I really think the same is true
for openings in the, in the superintendency
or any high, you know,
high level administrator position in schools that, um,
the platforms to promote these
and advertise them are fairly, uh, uh, you know, they're,
they're, they're very common now.
And that really, I think what the, the difference is, uh,
the, the service you have to help navigate through those
and to make sure, as you said, um,
and that, um, that the, the Kennedy you're getting is,
is aligned well with the values that you,
that are important to you.
So, for example, a a, you know, a diverse, um, uh,
if, if di diversity is a value that, that is, that is held
by South Portland will wanna make sure that, uh,
that any candidates who are interested in that, um,
you know, really aligned with that way of thinking as well.
Mm-hmm.
Thanks. Sure. Other questions?
I, I've got a couple more. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Um, have you found that most of the candidates
that you have pulled for Maine schools
are from Maine?
I, I, there's probably gonna be different
for South Portland than it will be for Belfast, for example,
but what, what have you, you guys been seeing in terms
of a candidate pool and people who are interested in,
in districts like ours?
We're, we're seeing candidates from, from Maine
and from the, the New England
and the, you know, the regionally and,
and really a across the country.
Yeah. Um, you know, we, we have to, there are some,
there are candidates who apply for everything.
So, you know, just, I'm sure that's true for, for
positions in teaching as well and,
and other administrative positions.
Not school board, though. Not school board.
That's right. That's right.
And, and maybe not, maybe not the executive director
of the state association either.
Um, but, um, yeah, so we're, we're,
we're getting inter we get interest from everywhere.
Um, sometimes it's a matter of, you know, we find, we, we,
we reach out to potential candidate and, and,
and we might hear, we
Get a sense pretty quick. We,
We might hear them say, where is it again?
And then we explain and, oh, yeah, no, I, I, yeah.
So, but, um, you know, a lot of the faces
that you saw in my slide deck are, um,
are new superintendents this year in the state of Maine.
And, um, you know, Barb, who's the superintendent in, uh,
the new superintendent in Herman, which is, uh, just outside
of Bangor, came to us from New Jersey.
Um, and, and, um, and what,
and then others are, are, you know, are from here
and have come up through the ranks within their own, um,
within their own district,
and that, that, that can work well as, as well.
Mm-hmm.
Um, final question.
Uh, have you all had experiences with, um, going
through the process, uh, of interviewing
and a board deciding that the final candidates are not
what they're looking for and kind of restarted that process?
Is that something you guys have experienced? We have
Experienced that.
You know, obviously the goal is not to get to that point
and, and, and come up, you know, come up empty handed.
But, you know, the, the fact
of the matter is we will support
you through the whole process.
Whether that takes what I expected, you know,
expect is generally three months,
or if you get to the, you know, if you go through a series
of interviews with, with some semi-finalists
and determine that none is a good fit for you, then,
then we, we start again.
Yeah. Uh, absolutely.
Okay. That's all I got. Okay.
Other questions? One more quick question. Yeah, go ahead.
The, um, the 8,000 that you quoted. Yeah.
That's just kind of like ballpark conservative estimate.
That's really top, top, top. Okay.
That, that would be the top really for us. Okay.
Um, yeah, six to eight, six to 8,000, uh,
is, is, uh, typical.
Um, and again, it, it depends on how much, uh,
involvement the board wants.
In some cases, boards want to, there are, we have some,
we've had some clients that were,
boards have wanted to do it themselves.
They just want to consult with us.
Uh, and so we're, you know, we serve as consultants
and we really are in the back, uh, behind the scenes, uh,
as I said, and that's not as, that's, I think our,
our hourly rate is 175.
I think that's noted in the cost proposal.
But, um, uh,
and then others have said, we don't have the capacity
to, to handle this.
We want you to do the whole thing.
And, and in those cases, it's roughly $8,000. Yeah.
And that's, again, that's a service
that we provide our members as well.
We don't offer superintendent searches, um, to, to just
to boards that aren't members of M-M-S-M-A or MSBA, but all
but three are in the state of Maine.
So who are those three?
I don't, you know, they're just, they're really tiny ones
who, one I just brought on, it's called,
they're called Morrow Plantation.
Bless their hearts. They, they just realized that they had,
um, a couple students and they didn't know they had it.
They don't have a school. And, uh, so I managed
to find a superintendent for them,
and now they're developing a, wow.
They're developing their policies
and they have to, um, you know, come up with a budget.
But, uh, very small ones that just,
they just don't see the value, the,
it probably wouldn't benefit them anyway, so, yeah.
Uh, board member ish. Hi. I was a little late. I'm sorry.
Fish. Um, how do we know you're effective?
Do you have any sort of metrics
or follow on once you've placed someone to say,
here's our stickiness, you know,
if we hire a superintendent, how they effective they were
with a particular organization?
Mm. Because I think this is a big challenge
that we're facing is Yeah.
Once you have someone placed, how does it work out?
I don't know. I, I, I don't think we've,
I don't think we've captured data around that.
There are so many variables involved in that.
I'm just worried about your maturity as an organization.
Yeah. Because usually as, as an organization grows
and learns from its placements, they could say,
we're effective in this way, and this is how we can improve.
Kind of like a postmortem,
I think the process has, has certainly evolved.
We, we have been doing this service for, for many years.
There, there are some in, in the, in the proposal either,
I'm not sure if it's the cost proposal
or the technical proposal.
We include some references, a list of Yeah.
Uh, a list of, um, SA in Maine where we,
where we have conducted the search.
Okay. Um, but, but some, but sometimes it's hard to know.
I mean, I guess if we measure, uh, we,
we certainly could measure, you know, are, is that person
still in place, uh, one year out,
three years out, five years out,
Even customer feedback y Yeah, yeah.
And getting customer feedback as well. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. I just wanted to check.
Thank you. The life of a superintendent, uh, I is not
that long to begin with.
Uh, so, uh, as you may know.
And so, uh, it, I'm just new to this Yeah.
Sometimes hard to determine what the,
what the, the factors are in that.
Right. Thank you very much. Certainly.
Other questions? Yes.
Is it safe to say that all your superintendents
that you placed for references are still there?
Yes. Okay. Yes. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Yeah, certainly.
Uh, member Dowling, Thank you.
Uh, I, I'm really concerned. Is my mic on? Okay.
I'm really concerned. This is going
to sound like a loaded question,
and I swear to God, I don't mean for it to be,
but, uh, do you happen to know, was MSMA the firm
that South Portland used for its last superintendent search?
Not interim superintendent, but
our last permanent superintendent. We certainly
Helped with the interim. Yeah.
I, I, I wasn't at the association,
but were any of you here?
I think so. I think, I think, um,
Dickie Matthews told me
that recently. I do too. Yeah. Okay.
I was just curious. There's nothing implied in that.
Yeah. We don't go back, we don't go back
that far in on page 10 in the, um,
in the technical proposal, there are lists of, uh, of, uh,
clients over the last three years.
But I know your, uh,
previous superintendent was placed in I think 2020.
So I'm not sure. I'm not sure if we did that one or not.
I certainly can find out, Adrian, if you'd like technical.
Yeah. I'm just curious. It's,
it's not like a deal breaker either way. Sure.
Yeah. Page 10. Oh,
Uh, other questions?
I have a few, but I just wanna give the opportunity
to other board members first.
Do you have questions? Go ahead.
Uh, so one of mine, um, Eric, is, uh, it, it's
somewhat dovetails with
what a board member Richardson was talking
about with diversity.
So, um, equity, the issue of equity
and diversity is a really critical one for me.
Um, and so I'm wondering how you,
um, h
how you go about looking at that, you know,
whi which I think is always hard when, assuming
that the team is you and,
and, um, um, Ellen, uh, Eileen Eile.
Eileen, yeah. Eileen, I'm sorry. And
Angie, and Angie does A lot of the work as well.
Yeah. So most of us, if we look up here, you know, most
of us are white.
Mm-hmm. All of us up here are white
and, uh, have limited lived experience
or no lived experience, uh, with issues of,
of equity and diversity.
Um, so I'm just wondering how,
how you get at those issues. How,
How do you capture That? Yeah.
When you're, when you're looking at candidates? Yeah.
Well, we would work very closely with you, Rosemary,
and with the board as we're preparing the, the profile
of the district, for example.
And, um, it sounds
to me like just in our short time here together,
that there are clearly some key components
that you would want to be underscored, uh, in
that not the least of which is, uh,
is is the rich diversity, uh,
here in South Portland within a, within a state,
and a region that is predominantly not diverse.
That would be an important, um, an important characteristic
to be sure is included in your profile.
And then also in the, in the posting of this position
that we, as I said, put out far
and wide, we'd wanna make sure that again, that's, that's,
that that's not, um, implicit, that we're explicit with,
with what's, what South Portland is, what it stands for,
and what its, uh, community is looking for
and its next leader.
And we would be just be very deliberate with, um,
you know, with including the, the, the points that you're,
that you're discussing, uh, now.
Okay. Thank you. And, um, so
if you're, if you're looking at different constituent
groups, I mean, we have our community, we have our, our
unions, we have our, uh, you know,
non bargaining unit staff members.
How do you do outreach to constituent groups?
And what are your strategies for? Right.
Well, we would, we would conduct, uh, again,
working closely with you, conduct listening sessions
with whatever, with whatever constituencies
you'd want us to sit with.
For example, your, your PTA, uh, uh, your,
it could be a group of, um,
of high school or middle school students.
It could be your, um, it could be, you know, uh,
the professional staff or the support staff,
your leadership team, your current leadership
team, whatever.
You know, that that's what, that's what we would do,
RIS Marie, is we would work with you to decide, okay.
As we're, as we're creating this profile, this district,
and, and determining what's, what's important.
Uh, we would meet, uh, in person with any group that you,
you know, we'd sit together and decide which groups mm-hmm.
You wanna have listening sessions on.
And, uh, you know, you know, obviously, uh, families.
Um, and, uh, gather all that data from those sessions
to, to help us, uh, formulate, uh, a profile for this, uh,
for this, uh, city's school system. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Yeah. Thank you.
Uh, my other question is,
is about the search team itself,
and I've, I've heard very different,
some very different models from different, uh, agencies.
Mm-hmm. So what, what is the typical
model you use for a search team?
Uh, or that you recommend, um,
in as you move forward?
Yeah. A a search team on your side of the Correct.
On your, okay. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
I, I, you know, again, we, we,
we would customize it Rosemary to, uh,
when you say a search team,
are you talking about it like an interview team?
A anything team know, I don't know what you're for,
you know, so there might be, there might be, uh,
a screening initially, you know, there might be a team
that does screening initially.
There might be a team that, uh, a search team
that does the interviewing.
And there might, I, I'm just curious how you usually set
that up and what that looks like as you, um,
as you've done it in other places.
Yeah. Again, I,
I keep coming back to our ability to customize mm-hmm.
For the way you, the way you want it. Uh, I'd want to do it.
The MSMA would want to do it the way that the Portland,
the South Portland School, uh, school board wants to, wants
to design that.
But in some cases, the boards don't
want to be involved in it.
In that case, we would, um, provide a proposal for you
for, uh, panels to, uh, do some initial, uh,
vetting of, uh, applications, uh, determining
what we're gonna, who we're, who's gonna be at the table
for the interviews.
Are we going to have two, uh, two discrete groups, uh,
and have the, the candidates, uh, move through both
of those independently?
One big one, um, you know, who is, who is at those tables,
ensuring that, uh, the, the people
who are there are representing the, the, the groups
that are, you know, that are important to you as a,
as a school board, so that they'll have that, uh,
they'll have a voice, uh, in the process.
So we, we really do just customize it, um, for,
for, for what you want.
Great. Thank you. Uh, member Holman, you had some
Questions. Well, I think, I think it's kind of
the same thing.
So, um, 'cause I'm looking here about candidate screening,
I guess you say selection criteria.
So those are, those are criteria
that would be developed here Yeah.
Amongst our board and those we choose to
Absolutely. The, the, the,
so the, uh, you know, the,
the vetting process, the, the, the selection of, uh,
semi-finalists or finalists, uh, that's all done by you.
We, you know, we, we don't make those selections.
We can make, uh, recommendations to you.
Um, but really, you know, we're here to support you in
that process, you know, and,
and, uh, we, we've often said we're, we're careful
to be agnostic when it comes to, to, to candidates.
But if, if there, if there are, uh, candidates who,
who we believe may not be a good fit, necessarily,
as we've gotten to know them through the pro,
through the process of, um, of the, uh, the search process,
we would, we would just share that information with you.
But, but ultimately it, it would be a decision of the,
of the, um, of the board and,
and who, whomever you decide, uh,
to include in that process.
Um, Eric, the, I'm gonna ask this question.
I hadn't thought of it before, but it just occurred to me.
So, you know, presenters are always going to talk about,
here's all the things that they can offer.
So if you were going to say, this is our weak suit, this is
where we could do better,
or where we don't really have a lot of experience,
or we don't really know how to proceed, what,
what would you define?
I I would say that probably our, our capacity is our,
is our, um, Achilles heel.
But as I said, when I, when I started out, um, you know,
at this point we we're doing very few searches
and several of them are being, are, are wrapping up.
And, and the intention is to, um, for board those boards
that we're partnering with to make decisions
before the holidays.
So, um, you know, if this, if this were February, I would,
uh, I would say there, there are February
or March, uh, I would say that there are gonna be,
if you were just launching this process,
then I would say there are gonna, there's gonna be a lot
of competing interests, um, uh,
because we're, you know, we're an association
of two executives and, you know, we have a staff of 23,
but we have a lot, a lot going on within that building.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I would say probably that, um, we, uh,
we could use a, a couple more people, um, perhaps even
to help with, uh, some of this work.
But, uh, in the absence of that, we, we get it done
and we, and do a good job.
Okay. Great. Uh, other questions from board members?
I just wanna give everybody a good opportunity to ask
whatever they might have for Eric.
Well, my card is, um, is also included in the packet.
And, uh, it, it has my cell number on it.
I know some people think that's crazy
to do, but I, it's on there.
So if you think of something afterward, if you want
to give me a call tomorrow, um,
or, uh, shoot me an email, then please do.
And, uh, if there's any more information
that you need in order to make this decision, we're,
we're, we're here to, to help
You with that. Great. Thank you. Thank
you so much,
Eric Appre appreciate it.
Thank you for this. Yeah,
Thanks everybody. Thank
You. You bet. Presentation,
um, it's quarter of six,
I'm guessing your Dave Dei.
Um, and, uh, so I'm gonna take a break
and let everybody have an opportunity to go to the bathroom,
get water or do whatever, and, um,
and have Andy come down and meet with you,
and just be sure that that technology is all going
the way it needs to go for you.
Okay, great. Okay. If everybody wants to,
uh, our second presentation is
with Dave Dusi from, uh, NSEC.
And, uh, again, everybody received these presentations,
so, um, and,
and Stephanie did put some hard copies around, uh, at,
at the table to be shared,
but, um, so I'm gonna turn it over to you, Dave, go right
Ahead. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Mm-hmm.
Uh, Rosemary, I appreciate the opportunity to be here.
Uh, good evening everybody.
My name's Dr. David Dusi,
and, um, proud to say this is my third year
as executive director of NS eq.
I replaced AB Benton Court, um, three years ago. He retired.
And, uh, ever since then, I've had the luxury
and the benefit to be a retired school superintendent,
but still in the, um, mix and working with districts.
A little bit about myself, uh, 33 years educator,
Massachusetts, uh, ended, I did my last 12 years
as a superintendent, Malden in sga.
And then I did one year as an interim in Raymond,
New Hampshire, when I saw a posting for an associate
director's job at nasdaq.
I applied, got the job,
and then six months later, art retired and I took over.
So it's a, it's a pleasure for us to be here.
Thank you for inviting us. Um, I don't have the power.
You have the proposal. I did send, uh, two documents.
My job tonight is just to walk you through
that very thick proposal
and be here to answer any and all questions.
Feel free to stop me mid presentation
and say, Dave, this just popped in my head.
I have a question. And, um, my goal is
to let you understand the process of
what a nsec search can bring to you to the,
um, efforts here.
So unfortunately, I go glasses to read
and then to see, so I'm at that point in my life
where someday I'll get transitional, I'm not ready yet.
But, uh, basically when we work, uh, with any school board,
our job really is to, uh, collaborate
and facilitate the overall search.
As I, you know, I heard, um, in the previous,
our job is to be the consultant.
We facilitate. We want to build a search that will work
for you, bring you the best possible candidate,
and, uh, we have our way of doing that.
But we're also here to say, you know,
what fits this district?
So one of the, um, I think the pieces
that NES EQ offers is a true flexibility,
and I'll go into that a little bit later
when we talk timelines.
We also, um, publicize broad, uh, nasdaq,
the New England School Development Council, uh,
covers six states.
We go from Connecticut to Maine
and everything in the middle, I have a board made up of, uh,
members from each one
of the participating states and some at large.
So we have a pretty broad base when we advertise out.
So when I do send out any type of notice for a job opening,
not only do, and I'll go over some of the, you know,
the usual, the school springs, the top jobs, A A SA,
we also focus on, um, certain minority
focused leadership programs such as the Association
for Latino, uh, educators, the Alliance
of Black School Educators.
So we, we reach out
and we put those postings out there, people see them.
But my constant contact base
for the six states we cover is over 10,000 strong.
And we break that down based on, uh,
assistant superintendents, superintendents, principals,
finance managers.
So when we blast
and email our yard job application letter
out, people see it.
The other thing we do is we'll also hard copy
that application letter locally.
So not only do we send it out through an email, we'll target
around Maine, other district superintendents,
we'll email hard.
I mean, I'm sorry, paper copy them.
And so they get it right to them on their desk.
But again, our outreach is big.
And we will draw candidates from not only, you know,
the United States, we've had candidates as far as you know,
Europe and Asia that see us
and check us out deal as, again, my electronic outreach
as part of the package, we would help you put together an
application letter.
And that's a collaborative piece between NSEC
and a liaison to the, to the, uh, school board.
We don't just put a posting.
We want you to tell your story about South Portland.
We want to hear the good things, we want
to hear what you're proud of.
We want you to be able to build
that application letter in a way that if I am an interested,
um, potential candidate, I have the ability to read
that application letter
and say, wow, this would be a good place for me.
Or I read it and say, you know what?
That's not really where I want to be.
So you have that opportunity to
not just post a job, but tell your story.
And we will work with, um, a school board member.
We always ask for a liaison that would be directly working
with the consultant that's assigned to the job.
Those two people become really, uh, joined at the hip.
We don't make a move
unless we move it through the, the board.
So that position is very important
because once, if we were to come on as your consultant,
it's the consultant and that liaison
and the liaison is the direct connection to the board,
and we are the, the back
and forth with the board and the liaison.
So that's one thing. So again,
we also do recruit candidates for you.
And usually it's outreach to us.
Someone will see the job,
somebody will see Nasdaq will get a call
and they'll say, I noticed that you, you know,
you have a search going on in South Portland.
What's going on with it? Can we talk?
So we also have people call us as well as if I know people
or some of my consultants might know people,
we may reach out and say, you know what?
I know you're looking, this is a great opportunity
just to drive up here.
I had somebody call, we're currently doing
a search of Massachusetts.
They called me and said, Dave,
can you tell me a little bit about what's going on?
I was thinking of applying. So we keep those lines
of communication open
and we have a pretty broad base that allows people
to find us and call us.
I think another piece we bring here is to help develop
the, we call it a candidate profile, which is basically,
you know, the guiding document for who
and what the next superintendent would be looking to do
and have skill traits.
So we hold four focus groups for you,
and the focus groups basically can be in person,
they can be Zoom,
but the goal of the focus group is to bring the community,
your stakeholders together.
And what we do is we ask two prompts.
Prompt number one would be, what are the skill sets,
the characteristics, the attributes that you would like
to see in your next superintendent?
And then the second prompt basically comes, what are some
of the challenges and some of the tasks this superintendent
will be facing as they walk
through the door in their first four to six months.
And what we do is through collecting the data,
collecting the notes, we will then begin to code it
and theme it for you.
And while the focus groups are happening,
we also have an electronic survey.
And that electronic survey with those same two prompts
goes out to everybody in the community.
And what we do is we collect all that data,
and it's an anonymous survey.
All people do is click who they are.
I'm a teacher, I'm an administrator, I'm a parent.
And we gather all of that data.
So between what we get from the focus groups
and what we pull together through all of
that electronic survey data,
we build you a candidate profile.
And the candidate profile, we usually comes out
with anywhere from three
to five major themes based on what we hear.
Um, I'll just, you know, give you an example, uh,
the next superintendent under skills, attributes
and uh, open communicator, right?
That's the theme. And then we'll bullet in underneath you
what came up with that theme.
You'll get some of the responses, you know, paraphrase ver
that says, we need somebody, a, a superintendent who will
have an open door, be able to meet
and reach out into the community,
a community forward superintendent.
So we do that. And then same on the task and challenges.
If we had, we go through it, we theme it, we code it,
and it comes back to the board in draft.
And then the board can look at it, review it, talk
with the consultant about it.
But if the board is, makes some corrections or adjustments
and then says, this is a good document.
That's the document you want to give
to your screening committee.
Because as they begin the process of looking for
through all the applicants, they now have a guide.
You need somebody that's a good communicator, somebody
that's that strong organizational, operational skills,
but, and there it is.
And what are some of the tasks?
And now you can set up your questions
to screen those candidates through that process.
And again, that's your document.
All the survey data we give to the, uh, board,
the only thing we do with that is we will look through it.
And what we try to do is if there's anything
to disparaging said,
so let's say I was your outgoing superintendent
and someone's like that, Dave Dusi, he was a no good da da.
We kind of collect all that. You get it.
We just pull it out of so
that anytime people are first na names are used in a
derogatory or than flattering way, we, we give that to you.
This way if you choose to use that other data,
it's clean, but you have it all.
So you can decide what to do with it.
So we start that process, we get you
through the focus groups, we get you your candidate profile.
We will also work with you to develop a screening committee.
Now the screening committee is your absolute
like driving engine for the search.
It is your most time consuming committee to be on.
And it, it carries the weight of the entire search process.
So we have farms, we have templates,
we have everything you need to look at review craft
to make it your own, but help you
figure out and work with you.
How do you want to develop the screening committee?
We recommend anywhere between nine and 12 people.
If it gets bigger than that, it's a little unwielding
because schedules are impossible
to get everybody on in the same room at the same time.
And the other thing we would suggest is think less
of people, but more of positions.
So let's say you happen to have, um,
a police officer who is also a parent in the district.
That would be somebody you could outreach
somebody on the city side, townside
that not only has kids in the district
but is also, you know, a, a selectman or a council person.
You bring them on an administrator union
representation, a union president.
So you grab people that represent a larger stakeholder group
so that they're on this committee
and they are the people
that ultimately will review all the applicants.
They will go through them all, they will rank them.
I'll explain that process.
And the bottom line is they're gonna, they will decide
who they will interview
and then through the screening process say, wow, we,
we screened six people.
Seven, we met them, we screened them, we interviewed them,
and these are the three finalists.
We wanna move to the board for the final decision
and interview process.
So what we do with the screening committee
process is two in-person meetings.
We're here first meeting, we'll work with them.
We explain, first of all, we catch them up
to what's already happened in the search
because some of them may be privy to it, some may not.
We get everybody caught up.
We talk about the importance of confidentiality.
Sometimes it's always nice if HR can be in the room
or on the committee or if the district has policies
around confidentiality.
That's the place to share it
because we stress that anybody that is in
that applicant pile may already be under contract
and also may not want their name out just yet.
So we stress that.
Now meanwhile at nasdaq, people apply to our website.
We collect uh, the applications, we collect the letters
of reference, we collect the resumes.
We also collect the cover letters.
So Dave's packet is at nasdaq. We collect them all.
When I come to that first screening meeting, at the end of
that meeting, the screening committee members get their a
private link that they will access all of those applicants.
Their job then is to review all the paper.
And then we supply a very simple survey with it.
So it comes down to, I'm on your screening committee,
I'm looking at all the paperwork
and I have just gone through um, Mary Smith.
And then here's the survey number. You, you click one.
If you definitely wanna see Mary Smith, you click two.
If you somewhat want to see Mary Smith
and you click three, if you don't want to see Mary Smith.
So by each member of the screening committee doing
that individually, when I come back on the second meeting,
they've already ranked the candidates.
I have that document
and that's where we begin our work for the second meeting.
And then the work is, alright, you see how everybody ranked?
Everybody number one carries a little bit of uh,
of weight to it.
Number two carries weight.
Three, it's like AP honors and college level.
So they have that. And then my job is to sit back
and help them basically go through that list
and decide we had 22 applicants.
Alright, we have these five.
Everybody really wanted to see, they scored pretty high.
These four on the bottom, nope. And then we have a middle.
And then the process starts.
They will deliberate, they will decide
and at the end of their process they'll tell me,
these are the six people we wanna move forward.
And then our consultants will reach out to them,
set up the schedule that we've given
to the screening committee, that first meeting.
So they know the screening, they know
that they know what they're doing.
We know what their plan is for interviews.
We reach out, set up those interviews,
confirm those interviews.
Then we reach out to everybody
that didn't move forward thanking them
for applying the school boards very, you know, thanks them
for their, however, they're not moving forward.
And then that process gets repeated again
after the screening committee screens
and says, we screen six, these are the three finalists.
They let the consultant know consultant then reaches out
and we get ready to come back
and work with the school board on their process
school board process is a little different
because once the finalists are named, we will reach out.
We, we ask them for a resume
that they don't mind being public.
We also give them a list of 12 to 15
references we would want to give to us.
And then we have their references.
We have their clean resumes,
and then we would come back to the board
and hold them another in person meeting
to discuss your process, where you wanna go
and how you wanna do your interviews.
Usually the liaison
and the consultant has already breached that
and have worked with the board, and there's a plan for it.
But we also allow the board to get all the references.
And our recommendation is break up.
The board references the way we give them to you.
So we ask for so many from, uh,
a reference from a school board member,
a reference from an administrator,
and a reference from a parent.
And then the board, if they take a, a little advice,
each board member says,
all right, I'll call all the parents.
One says, uh, because the reason we do that is
because when it comes time to deliberate,
after you've interviewed, everybody has something
to add to that moment.
They can say, well, I talked to all the parents
and all I heard was good things.
He's really communative or she's re she's community forward.
The always met the administrators, we talked, all liked him.
They said he was. And that gives everybody something to add
to that deliberation.
After the interviews said a lot.
I'm willing to take a breath.
It's okay. Let me just see if there are questions at this
point in, uh, Dave's presentation.
Uh, member Dowling.
Thank you. Uh, Dr.
Dusi, can you say how many searches, uh,
NASDAQ is doing right now for superintendents?
Right now? We currently have, uh, one in Amesbury Mass.
We are doing, um, I could be one in Connecticut
and we just grabbed another one in Massachusetts.
Uh, um, so we, right now we have three in the mix,
and I have this proposal out, uh, proposal out
two propo, y'all one, another one in Maine,
and I believe I have one down in Connecticut.
So that's where we're at right now.
And, uh, there's a principal search going on, but,
Okay. Thank you. Yep.
Uh, member Smith, um,
Do you all have recent experience with the main district?
As a matter of fact, um, if the search was to be ours,
it would be my search
because I do, um, much like our, the, you know, uh,
main school board, we are also trying
to put more people on the ground.
Yes, I did the, um, Falmouth search last year
where I trained somebody with me on that search,
and we did RSU 21.
Currently, my proposal is out in Yarmouth
and here, so right now I would be the lead consultant, um,
because I'm trying to train people as we go into this.
Mm-hmm. And I have a retired super, not from Maine,
but a retired super that is moving to Maine that
will hopefully be able to come on and work with me
and train up with this.
So I'm trying to build my ranks
by just being out training with people.
Mm-hmm.
Do you have other questions, uh, asking you first?
You're all set right now. Okay. Um, member Richardson.
Um, I, I mean, I'm, I'm probably gonna ask this question
for everybody tonight mm-hmm.
Because it's the most important one for me is, is that, um,
you know, south Portland
and our community is, um,
I think it's like a microcosm of the world.
It's not the typical Maine, um, town.
And, um, we have a pretty
extensively diverse population.
That's, um, I think what makes us a really interesting,
um, place to, to live and to go to school.
And so those are, um, you know, I, I appreciated you kind
of leading with how you're, um, that that's a focus
that's clearly a focus of your organization to sort
of tap into the non-white Yeah.
Organizations, so to speak.
Um, so do you have, um,
data on, uh, how s how you, you know,
any sort of non-white
superintendent hires that you've helped?
And, and not to say that that's the only no qu, you know,
but, um, you know, how do you,
how do you measure success with that? Or?
It's hard to measure because I, I'm thinking
of a recent search where it was a person
of color from Minnesota made it to the finals mm-hmm.
But didn't get the jobs. Mm-hmm.
So, you know, it's hard for us to say how many apply versus
how many get screened out at that process.
Yeah. But we do have candidates of color
that will apply for jobs.
It then comes down to, you know,
the screening committee doing their job and,
and really what, you know,
and again, I think that's where the focus groups and the can
and the candidate profile comes out,
because if that's something that the stakeholders feel
is important, it will come out in their, in their responses
to such questions.
You know, we need somebody that, you know,
may be a representation of the district we're asking him
or her to lead and so on like that.
But yeah, I, we wouldn't, I, I wouldn't have
that data even if I dug back,
because I don't think it's data.
We would, you know, save like that.
And again, we could get four people of color to apply,
but that doesn't mean they get moved past the
screening for whatever reasons.
Um, the, the other question I have is, um,
we are in a bit of, we're in a bit of a kind
of rebirth here.
We have a pretty new board, uh, a mem of a representation.
And, you know, we, we've gone through a pretty tense, uh,
and, um, kind of public, uh, situation
with our departing superintendent and,
and not, um, you know,
and there really was not in alignment at the end
with the board and, and our superintendent at the time.
And, um, you know,
how do you, how do you help manage the optics of
that for us?
Because I, you know, I don't, I, we're not a scary group,
but, but there is, you know, there's, if, if you Google,
if you Google our district,
you're gonna see some articles. And
So, yeah. The reason
I'm smiling is I,
I'm basically stepped away from the
superintendent for three years.
Um, if I'm a, if I'm a superintendent looking
for a job, and I'm,
I'm gonna do my homework prior mm-hmm.
Most do. So I'm gonna know,
I should know more about you than you know,
about me walking in for an interview if I'm doing my job
as a true candidate and an applicant for the position.
Mm-hmm. Now, the funny part is when I'm in front
of a screening committee, I tell them,
we don't advise you Google, we tell you,
we don't tell you not to.
You know, we, you're gonna do what you do.
I always tell the screening committee,
please read the whole story.
Don't just grab the headline.
Because if you were to Google me walking out the door
as a superintendent, I made some unpopular decisions,
or I made hard decisions that put me
in a position where, uh, look at this.
He was in go, uh, he, there was a lawsuit.
He was in the middle, read it all. Mm-hmm.
And I think that's what a superintendent would do,
looking at your community.
And the other piece is in your application letter,
we had worked with you on that, but,
but don't duck the fact
that you are uniquely different in Maine.
Don't put it right in there
that we have a very diverse population.
We are looking for leadership that can't.
You, you get that piece in there,
and then you get to put a little bit about the skills that,
you know, the trades and skills you are looking for.
But in today's day
and age, I was just talking
with a principal who's looking for a job.
Um, you, you have to be honest.
So if I sat in front of you
and you said, well, we Googled you.
This happened when you were in this district,
I could look at you and say, well, it, it was settled.
Both parties agreed. We're never gonna talk about it again.
'cause legally that was the way to go. Or I'd say, yep.
It was a decision I had to make.
I followed through, it's what I did,
what was right for the district.
And lo and behold, it worked out.
So I think any superintendent, myself included,
if I was looking at a job, I would do my homework.
And for whatever reason,
the other superintendent is no longer here.
That would be like, okay, if I get the job,
I better make sure I don't make those same mistakes.
Or do you know? And I think it is what it is.
Today's social media, it's even hard,
you know, for board members.
You're in the community are local.
It, it's, it's something that all of us that are,
we're in the profession.
You, you know, it's coming.
And it was hard for my wife at times,
because you're gonna, yeah, I'm not gonna respond.
That's that. Nope. We are fine.
And I think a superintendent, if the superintendent
that was interested called us,
the good part is we're gonna refer that person back
to either the liaison that's the spokesperson,
or whoever the spokesperson for the search.
And the board would be, we don't answer those questions.
We give it back to the people that know.
So I would say, don't be as worried about that.
Somebody that's going to apply already knows what happened,
and they're like, that doesn't scare me.
Or Yep, I can see where that went.
And they'll come in, but don't duck it either.
So if there's a piece of you, just be upfront, put it,
tell you, have an opportunity in, in the application letter
to kind of highlight your strengths, talk about, you know,
consistency, budget.
But put it out there,
and I'll do my homework if I'm interested.
And if there's something in the paper that, uh, on YouTube
that says X, I'll read,
I'll read the whole article and decide.
But like you said, you, you're also, don't be afraid
to talk about the changing of the board and all of that,
because I think in fairness, that paints the picture.
Mm-hmm. And you are going to get an applicant that's like,
that's right up my alley.
I'm used to going into places
and work with change and do this and this.
I guess what I'm saying for whether you're the applicant
or the school board, there's no hiding anymore.
It's all out there. So we're all ready to accept it
and just, you know, move forward with it.
Member Holman? No, uh, member Rich.
Oh, I have no questions. Member Smith.
More member Doey.
Um, I mean, there's more.
I don't think I have any right now. He's not done anyway.
What I, I don't not done. No, I know.
I have a couple questions. Yeah, yeah. Sure.
And I, and I can ask them now.
Finish, or you can go forward.
All right. I just, you know, and you know, basically
what we do is, um, when it comes, like I said,
we collect all the applications.
We do not screen for you.
So if 30 people apply,
your screening committee gets to see all 30.
Uh, nes EQ has always had the stance.
It's not up to us to decide who's right for you.
That's what this process is built to do.
So we do not, um, screen anybody.
So if 30 come in, all 30, move forward, we do,
however, you know, when it comes to finalists,
we will absolutely check their, uh,
educational credentials for you.
We don't do deep dives on, um, you know, any of the, uh,
what do you call 'em, like the criminal records and stuff.
We leave that up to the board,
but we will check to make sure all their, uh, certs
and all their accredited doctorates are all in in line.
We do that. And we'll gather those references for you.
That's our job. But, um, really our job is
to facilitate work with you.
We hold everything together paper-wise.
We give it all over to you. We have templates for you.
So you don't have to reinvent wheels.
You just can plug and choose which ones you like.
And we are with you through the whole process, if requested,
we come in and sit through the interviews,
through the screening.
We tend not to.
And it's interesting
because as I talked to a,
a person today who's being moved forward, he's like, oh,
I'm, look, this was great talk.
I'll look forward to meeting you.
And I'm like, no, I'm not there.
The screening committee interviews you.
We don't, because just by having us in the room,
you'd be surprised.
People turn around
and think the search agent has a real piece of this,
and they start interviewing to us.
It's not, no, that's, you know, we're on call.
The liaison would have a cell number,
and if something should go awry, quick text, quick call.
It's constant. The other thing we like to,
we are doing more in searches
is we don't wanna just dump it all on you at once.
So you also should have a draft
of like a ti a a milestone timeline.
And in that timeline, there's chunks that need
to get done at certain times.
We'll help you develop that timeline.
Should we get, uh, hired as your consultant,
we start backwards by design.
When do you want to have your superintendent?
Usually a July 1st stop. But when do you want to hire them?
When do you want them on paper for the district?
We want 'em in March. Beautiful. We'll work backwards.
We draft it, we bring it back.
School board looks at it, tweaks it. Nope.
We have a meeting that week. Okay.
But we'll chunk the information out.
And I like the idea of the liaison
and the consultant quick, 15, 20 minute zooms periodically.
So if I sent information out,
I'd probably set up a quick zoom, walk the
liaison through that information.
And then it, it's a background.
I'm a ex special ed teacher, and I like to chunk things
because I get lost in all the paperwork
that comes with these things.
So we would do, that's the process I tend to like
to use is quick check-ins, zoom, here's the next punch,
here's your screening committee information.
Here's what you need to do. Boom. I'll be there this day.
And we just do that back and forth.
But, um, basically, um, it is,
let's talk about the timeline.
Uh, Falmouth was an interesting search.
That's 120 day comprehensive timeline in front
of you with the benchmarks.
Falmouth asked us, um, we wanna get it done faster.
I said, okay, how much faster?
And we kept working that timeline back and forth.
We did a full comprehensive search.
Everything we're talking about in that
proposal you have in 75 days.
The trick to that, the liaison has
to be, and I, I looked at them
and Falmouth, I said, I can keep up
with you if you can keep up with us, and vice versa.
So that's where that kind of strong communication
between, and the sur they, they did their focus.
They got the entire comprehensive search.
We did it in 75 days.
But it has to be, you know, you really have
to have somebody that's gonna like,
really push the work with us.
When did they start? Was it, were they kind
of late? Is that, what was their
No, I think we, we, it was funny.
You are not beyond the time zone right now.
We received a,
we were quiet all sep like August, September,
and then December hit
and all of a sudden proposal, proposal proposal.
And then we did searches.
I, in Rhode Island, I have consultants down there.
We placed two superintendents the last week
of June in Rhode Island.
So the search process was a little bit later, last year.
You are right in the mix right now.
You have plenty of time
because you have the holidays rolling in.
And then they kicked their search off.
It was right after the holiday.
So we pushed it from January boom, and we were done.
And, uh, you know, RSU 21, shorten did a little, I
I'm trying to get my consultants, my company to understand.
Districts are, uh, pressed for time,
and our job is to work with them,
not necessarily say fit in our box.
'cause that doesn't work anymore on all the fronts.
We're trying to do more where we're in the com,
we are in the districts more saying, when do you need us?
What time? How can we be there?
So just to show you that, that timeline looks daunting,
but in reality it can be shorter.
Other questions?
Uh, I have a couple. Um, one of them is,
uh, what are your offerings in terms of
mentorship after the selection and, um,
and also, you know, mentoring the superintendent,
but also building relationship with the school board.
Do you do any of that work as
Well? So it, yes,
as a matter of fact, um, one of the,
the new models that I'm bringing to Nsec is,
uh, entry plan work.
And I think the entry plan work.
Uh, Steven Falmouth, he's,
he's an accomplished superintendent.
He, he's done some good work in Maine. I came on with him.
And it's really the entry plan, if we do the search,
is a significantly reduced cost.
And the goal is to work with the new superintendent
to allow the superintendent the opportunity to get,
to get his, get his or her feet on the ground,
and begin to learn the community, work with the community,
get out there before you just walk in
and say, this is right, this is wrong.
So yes, we're starting to break into working
with the entry plan, uh, with the superintendent.
And I am very interested,
and I've talked with the, um,
I think her name might be Eileen, doing some work
with school boards around, not just, you know, trainings,
different types of trainings, you know, entry plan work.
What does that look like? Even
amongst school boards, you bring people on.
There's been a lot of turnover on school boards.
So we're putting together,
and I think if you, I can send it to, um, you mm-hmm.
Uh, Rosemarie, it's basically executive, um,
we call it executive projects,
but it's really kind of like pd.
The entry plan is one of them.
We would work with the superintendent,
the school board to help them build that.
But also we do some other, you know, interesting stuff
for, for school boards.
A simple, you know, one day, half day training, you know,
starting with the why of the work through Simon Sinek.
We could come in, do a, a workshop for you.
We are really trying to do some other things, you know,
beyond just the, here are the norms, here's Robert's rules,
really to embrace the, the, the work of the board.
And over the summer, maybe the superintendent, you do kind
of a joint workshop.
And the topic could be anything from conflict resolution to,
you know, purpose of the work.
Start with why, why did you run for school board? Why?
And build that out. It's a way to build relationships.
But I'll send you a, a document on that.
I'm in the, well, I'm in the office tomorrow.
We'll send it out. Okay. That's great.
Christina is an ace and she'll work with me on that.
Um, so my other question was,
and again, this, this fits with what, uh,
board member Richardson talked about
with the issue around diversity.
So, uh, does your,
do you have any help?
Um, you said that, that this would be, you know,
you would be the lead person.
Yep. Do you have any help with other people
who have more lived experience than we do
as the white school board you're hiring, you know,
helping us, uh, so
that, yeah.
So we can look at those issues, you know,
that are really hard to look at when, uh,
when you don't have that background.
I have people in the field
that I've worked with in the past.
Um, what you're struggling with, my,
my entire resume has been urban districts in Massachusetts.
And, um, it's a matter of, uh, really
I think getting to understand your, your community,
your stakeholders, where they're at.
Sometimes I think the, there's a misconception between
what we believe the needs are versus what
they think the needs are.
So, um, if that's something you're really interested in,
I can, I can reach out to a few people that I know
that are in that field.
And if you're looking for work around, you know, diversity
and inclusion, we can talk offline on that. But,
Okay. So Dave,
so we have A-A-A-D-E-I director, her Gil Apollo,
um, who would be willing to work with somebody
as well, you know, so that, that's
what I would hope we would do is include
Him. Yeah. I could reach out to, uh,
like I said,
I still have contacts out in many areas,
and I'll see if I can, um, find a connection for you.
So my, one of my other questions is, um,
so you talked about, uh, a screening committee,
and then when is it that the whole board, you know,
is it seeing the whole board seeing three finalists or four
or two or what, whatever it is.
Like when does the whole board get back into the loop?
So the, that would be a timeline.
So I'll talk to the, um, I'm, again,
I'm involved in a principal search right now.
Mm-hmm. So they had their timeline.
It started back in end of October.
We just had our first screening committee meeting, uh,
was December 3rd.
Our second one was the ninth.
Their, their screening the 15th and 17th.
So in that kind of two
and a half week period, they're, they'll come
to their conclusion and then they're gonna put
that out their finalist.
And where it's a principal search,
that'll go right to the superintendent.
They'll do their thing.
So we try to build at least two and a half weeks.
And we always try to do that first meeting,
either a Tuesday or a Wednesday.
And then we come back either a Tuesday or a Wednesday.
'cause that gives everybody from Thursday fri the
weekend to go through everything.
Mm-hmm. Rank them.
And then we'll build that right after that.
You go right into the screening, depending upon two,
let's say you screen six to seven people, you can knock
that off in two and a half days.
We'll help with it. We'll give you a draft schedule,
you plug it in the way you want.
But we'd, we'll make it a suggestion.
Like I know in, um, the Amesbury search,
she is tonight just starting her screening committee
work for a superintendent.
She'll be back next week, the beginning of the week,
and they'll go into their screening the following week.
They wanted to get it literally done just before Christmas.
And then now you come back,
the board will be involved right after January.
Same with the superintendent.
She'll have her finalist ready to go a meeting with her
tomorrow at three to see how she want,
but she'll be ready for that first week in January.
So that's, that's where it is.
And then the other thing I'm going to suggest, win lose
or draw whoever, put a, a superintendent, uh,
search link on your webpage.
Mm-hmm. And then as whomever, the search agent,
as information's coming to you, put it in there so
that people see it, the whomever the liaison is
with whatever search company,
put it on the agenda just to do updates.
Because that's where you would announce surveys online.
That's where you would announce your focus groups.
That's where you would do that.
And I find that that really puts a level of transparency,
because people will check, people will look in,
people will go back
and say, oh, there, what's going on with the search?
And you just keep that, that page alive
right up until it's over.
The other thing school boards have
to figure out is when the finalists are named, again,
Massachusetts very different.
Everything has to be done public. Other states do not.
So you may not want
to go public right away with the finalists.
That's something you would tell your consultant.
We would put that, oh, you may say, all right,
Dave, this is the meeting.
It's gonna be April 2nd.
We're gonna announce the finalist,
and then we're going into the interview
process the next week.
And, and that's something we would work out with you.
But again, I'm coming from a background
where everything in Massachusetts is public.
So they would go public.
That's why the finalists need to know at that point,
you are about to go public.
They're gonna announce you at this board meeting.
Yeah. And that brings me to one of my questions, Dave,
was, is, you know, so let's say that there were two
or three finalists.
Yep. It would be my thought anyway, that, um,
that, that those people might, uh, have
a community night or a day in the school district.
And, uh, so it, it does become public. You, you know,
Like Right. Yeah. Want that.
And then it's, it comes down.
So the, if you were to go with us, basically,
I would come back and we would do the whole,
I'd have a timeline.
'cause I would talk to the liaison
and get that, come back with a draft timeline,
and then walk the board
through the process a little tighter.
A little closer. 'cause you'll have the timeline now.
Mm-hmm. And you can see how it starts to fall in
and how that, those benchmarks become real when the
application letters do, when the screening,
when you're gonna announce focus groups when the
survey gets launched.
So you'll see that play out in that timeline.
There will be that moment where the board has to decide,
okay, how do you want to do this?
Very few boards are going to districts now
most are bringing the candidates to them.
And that can be done any way you, you feel works.
Um, the,
the two main ones I did ended up breaking them
to like half days, right?
Morning. One person came in afternoon,
one person came in next day, one per,
so they had all four in, and then they conducted interviews
and then they deliberated.
But, um, again, think of time
and think of people that it takes, you'd have
to set up a schedule where, you know,
board members would be available to meet me on at the door,
walk me through, make sure you have different places for me
to go sit down, meet and greet.
Some will do a public forum.
Some will do all the public forums in one day at different
times, and then interview.
So that's something you as a board will have to decide
how you want to proceed once you know,
the screening committee is ready to get to work
and do what they're doing.
So, and again, we would work with you on
however you choose to go.
And our job would be to inform the finalists.
This is the plan, this is how it's working.
And we would fill that schedule.
And so I'm guessing that you would also assist the board
in, in that final step, uh, in
developing appropriate questions for, for
The interview, we have banks. Yeah. So
what we would do is, even
for the screening committee, um, NASDAQ's been doing this
for a long time, I think since the early eighties.
And what we've been able to do is just gather questions.
And we've broke them down for the screening committee
based on themes, like budget questions,
curriculum questions.
And I always advise at that point, you know,
it's an hour interview.
You have me in front of you. There's 12 of you.
You each get, probably 10 of you get to ask a question
with a five minute response.
But then we have a separate bank of questions
for the school board, because you are gonna have me in front
of you a lot longer.
You are gonna have me there, and you get to go deep dive.
So yeah, all of this would be given to you.
And again, it's yours to tweak, choose, make it yours,
make it fit what you need.
But there's, you know, to reinvent it all is a lot of work.
At this point. We, we've got countless numbers
of templates to give you to look at.
And again, the liaison and, and,
and the consultant would be doing these
periodic quick hit meetings.
So if questions come up where they're, to answer them
Other questions.
Uh, so, so
what do you think is a major factor in
effectiveness for, for this?
You've been in this for a little while.
What is like the major thing you have to do right,
As a school board?
Honestly, I think the major thing you have to do right,
is really that screening committee.
Okay. Like composition.
Yeah, the composition and,
and the, to be honest with them that it is time consuming.
Okay. So they're giving up roughly, uh, about two
and a half weeks of their lives to this.
And those interviews, even, let's say you wanted
to do three, a three a day, I would recommend, you know,
you do the 4, 4 15 organizational meeting,
hour interview, little break.
Uh, so you're done.
And you have people home by, especially in the winter,
by, you know, eight o'clock.
It, it's a long day.
Even for board members, you mostly, you are on the ground.
I'm a pelli, we're on the ground early.
But it's that piece I think you screening committee
and board members get, you should put one
or two board members.
Usually the liaison sits on that, but another board member,
because that's a great way for the board
to the members that weren't there to get that.
Like, no, this was real work.
Everybody stepped to the plate. Deliberations were real.
And, and it also allows this little bit of, um,
a credibility to it.
It gives the credibility to that committee
that the board's taken.
Its serious. And the board's part of the process
on who moves forward.
It's not just nine random people trying to figure it out.
But I will tell you, they, I was surprised
how serious they take that role.
And they will deliberate everybody up
and down, whether they're the first or the last,
and they will make decisions.
And I've seen top seeds drop,
and I've seen bottom seeds move up
based on the discussion in that room where people say, well,
I voted I wanted to see him.
Here's why. Or, I saw this in his paperwork
or her paperwork, this is what I liked.
The screening committee is huge.
And then basically, um, one other thing.
Give the liaison that little bit of authority to maybe
approve an application letter so it doesn't have
to come back for a board meeting.
'cause that will slow down your timeline. Excellent.
So, okay. Pick the right liaison, give them the authority
to approve an application letter after everybody's seen it
and you get it in draft.
Yep. They're good with it. Bang. Or the candidate profile.
Right. Thank you for your answer. Thank you.
That speeds it up a bit.
Um, Dave, my last question.
I'll ask you the same thing that I asked to Eric.
And that's, if you were gonna say, you know, you,
you've listed all your strengths,
all the things you would do, what would you say
is your shortfall your weak suit? Or if anything, it,
It's the same thing.
We are, we're all in the, I'm the executive director
and I'm covering right now A lot
of miles in a week, in a day.
Uh, only because, uh, you, you, I'm waiting for people
to retire so that I can snag them and pull 'em on.
So I, I, I mean this sincerely, I have two ex board members
that retired and I'm like,
would you love to work for nasdaq?
They're like, yeah, Dave, we will.
So I have one doing facilities work for me,
and I have another board member helping me in New Hampshire.
So honestly, I'm just, um, I, I, I still got some,
you know, legs left.
I'm out there. That's why I am here tonight.
And I will, uh, train any job I'm getting now.
I'm trying to train people in.
So I do have somebody in the wings just moved to Maine,
have a house in Maine.
And I said, how far are you away from this district?
And she's like, not far, Dave. Maybe 45 minutes.
I go, great. You may be, uh, getting trained up.
But that's where I, that's where I am right now.
Like I said, it's my third year.
Um, I recognize NS EQ is, is well established,
but I'm also understanding that, you know,
like everything else with age
and time, you've gotta kind of recreate, you gotta rebrand.
And that's where we're at. So I'm pulling board members in.
I have a, a gentleman about to retire, remain
that I've already kind of talked to, to see if
that person can, uh, do some work for us.
But yeah, so right now I'm on it.
I, I'm kind of the main consultant 'cause I'm in Salisbury.
90 five's an easy drive and, um, I can be up and back.
Thank you. Did you have a question? Other questions?
Um, Dave, the only last thing I'm gonna say is,
so my parents grew up in what was then Scully Square,
what is now government center.
No matter how hard you may be trying to hide that accent,
you know, it doesn't happen.
Okay. I have relatives in Dorchester, ma and
Hy Park you're looking at. Yeah.
An East Boston guy
Just grew up there. Yeah,
I can tell I can help.
I try. I try it. But every now
and then is I get excited when I'm talking it,
it definitely drops off, but yeah.
Yeah. I, I'm a, I'm just a, you know,
It's okay. I won't hold it
against you. Nothing to be ashamed about.
Yeah, exactly. You know, it's just No, absolutely.
No, honestly, it's, I was fortunate
to be the first in my family to actually graduate college.
And I, you know, my parents
were like, go get a piece of paper.
They didn't know what I was gonna do with it. Right.
But they said, go get one. And I did. So here I am.
It's been a crazy road, but I'm happy now
because I'm still engaged in education,
but I'm not the guy interviewing for this job.
So I'm good with it.
Do you have any questions for us?
Uh, honestly, no. I mean, I'm good. And, um,
Coming. Thank you. Thank you
very much. And thank you for coming.
It was a pleasure. And thank you for, you know,
at least giving us the opportunity.
Absolutely. I appreciate you. Absolutely. Thank
You. You have a nice
Night. Thank you. Be careful. Let's
get a little Yeah, I know.
I know. Have a nice night. Thank you.
Almost fell over. Come over. Okay.
Do people need another break
or do you wanna just begin with Jeff?
Can I have, like, I Yeah, yeah, go ahead. Totally, totally.
Thank you. And then you're up, Jeff. Okay.
Uh, Jeff Melendez from Zeal Education Group,
and, um, he will do his proposal now.
Thank you, Jeff. And thank you for being here.
All right. Thank you. Thanks for having me.
Um, it was interesting getting to hear, you know,
from, uh, two other search firms.
I'd never been in an, in an interview where I got to listen
to the other search firms, um, present before me.
So, um, it was interesting.
I think whatever you do decide,
you're gonna end up with a great superintendent.
Um, I trust that. Um,
however, I think the, the path that you would take
and potentially the superintendent
that you find would be different if you were work with us.
Um, and I say that
because of our process being quite a bit different than,
uh, what was described here.
And rather than go through, um, every step,
I'd rather, I think a lot of it's gonna be the same in terms
of, um, some of the things,
but some of the things are gonna be quite different.
Let me, oh, I got a, oh, that's interesting. Okay.
So just quickly, a little bit about myself and about Zeel.
So, been in education for 25 years.
Teacher, principal, superintendent,
worked in Westchester County, New York,
which is the suburb of New York City.
Um, uh, went to school at Teachers college in New York City,
uh, Columbia University, two masters and a doctorate.
I taught there as an adjunct for about 12 years.
Um, was a, a teacher,
principal superintendent in both Westchester County
and Fairfield County, Connecticut.
Uh, six years as superintendent.
Three years ago, I started this consulting firm.
And the premise of our firm is that we want
to be like the Mayo Clinic, which is a sort
of different model of supporting those in need.
And it's, it's more centric to the, to the school
or district and the way we provide support.
So rather than, um, if you're a school district
and you need a strategic plan going to one firm
and you need professional
development, you go to another firm.
We have about 120 people on our team
with passions in all different areas
and scopes of education.
And my job as the CEO is to, is to form teams.
Um, so in addition to,
obviously superintendent searches, we do audits.
We're working in Kenny Bunk port.
We're gonna be starting a project, um, very soon,
doing a complete comprehensive efficiency audit of all
of their programs, their finances.
Um, we do work on chronic absenteeism work in New York City.
Um, we do, we do work all over, all over the country.
So, um, really here, excited
to talk about our superintendent search,
um, and how we do that.
So again, we have, uh, a really diverse team,
about a hundred hundred, over a hundred people on
our team with different passions.
The team that I put together for this particular project,
uh, can be seen here.
And, and, uh, my colleagues send their, their regrets
that they couldn't join us tonight.
Um, so myself, I, this is the only, that wasn't me, was it?
No, that's me. I'm sorry. Every meeting, sorry.
This is the, these are really the main projects
that I'm involved in, which is the superintendent searches.
Um, other projects are sort
of outsourced to the people on my team.
Um, but we have Deb, uh, Worthham.
Deb is a, um, a really dynamic, um, educator,
well-known, speaks at the national level.
Um, former superintendent in several very complex districts.
Peter Light is a current superintendent in Acton Boxborough,
um, in Boston, about a couple hours from here.
And then Ebony is, uh, just the dynamic.
Uh, she retired from one role
and is now, uh, was asked back as, uh, I think a CAO for,
uh, a large district in Maryland.
So these, these people are just,
they understand the pro the work,
they understand education at very deep levels
and, um, honored to work with them on this project.
So, um, like I said, we do things differently,
but these are some of the things
that I think any firm is gonna provide.
As you heard all the bios of the, the people
that are in searches, search firm work,
are former superintendents.
We're gonna engage your stakeholders.
Um, and that's one of the areas that you'll see.
We, we differ in our approach to that.
Um, we're all gonna, if you wish to have a national search,
um, which I always, I would recommend, um,
we are gonna use our, our network and leverage that.
And we're going to, uh, facilitate all of the, um,
elements that are, that are part of narrowing the field
and selecting a candidate.
Again, I think that's another area
where we do it a little bit differently than
that was, that was described today.
I'm not gonna go through the entire, uh, process.
This visual is just really to help you realize
that there are a lot of moving parts in a
superintendent search process.
We guide you through all of them.
Uh, but the first thing that I think is,
is really different about the way we do it, is I like
to consider it concierge level service.
So, um, where, um, and,
and it's a, um, NASDAQ has been doing searches,
I think since the seventies they mentioned.
So they obviously have a, a very good track record.
Um, they hand you a lot of templates.
They have, you identify a, a, a steering committee
or a selection committee.
Um, we do all of that work for you.
We're very, very involved with you
through every single step of the process.
And the reason for that, and we don't, we also recommend,
which is a little bit different than
what I heard them describe.
Um, we, we recommend that the board be the,
the only group involved in the selection, the review
of applications, and ultimately the decision.
And I can talk more about that
or answer specific questions about why that is.
But it, but I do think, um, the success
of your superintendent is gonna be contingent upon, uh,
the relationship that you build and the, the trust
and the foundation of trust that is
directed from the very beginning of this process.
So, um, that's our approach,
and I'm happy to answer questions and explain why that is.
Um, the other thing that we try to do is make it so that,
because you're all busy, um, we, we make it so
that when you begin the process, you come in, you work,
you come into an a conference room to do interviews, um,
you are fully prepared.
Um, everything is very clearly laid out for you by our team.
Um, all of the correspondence, everything is very, um,
we're very hands on in that.
And we do that just because you have your own lives to live
and families to provide for.
And, and, and this is what we enjoy doing,
what we're good at, and what we, um, do to make sure
that you're, you're aware of the entire process.
Another thing, and I don't think I heard this mentioned
that we do, is, um, we provide weekly updates.
So every Friday you'll get a very, um, um, concise bulleted
email, and it's gonna just say, here's the things
that we're doing this week, or here's what happened,
here's what's happening next week.
And we preempt with any,
just like I'm sure your interim superintendent and,
and you as a board, you don't want surprises on either side.
So if something is happening in the community
or something is happening in the news,
like when we had the superintendent, um, Ian Roberts from,
I don't know if you heard, did you hear about that?
Yeah. Yeah. So with the, um,
and that's another thing that's different.
We, we are with you through the third party due diligence.
We do that due diligence reporting, um,
through a third party,
but on your behalf, we recommend it, um,
because it is very important
and boards will be scrutinized for hiring people
that aren't citizens and whatnot.
So, um, we keep, you keep surprises out of your way,
and we are very, um, transparent in communication.
Um, another thing that I think is very different in,
in our approach is in terms
of proactive stakeholder engagement.
So I heard NASDAQ talk about they do four, uh,
meetings with your community.
Um, we do and,
and we pride ourself on, um, going to every corner
of your community to engage, to find, to proactively,
um, speak with all of the different stakeholders.
What you see in the, in the middle of the, of
that image is a stakeholder engagement calendar.
Uh, and this sort of speaks
to why our pricing structure is a little bit different.
We will spend a whole week, um, in your community
through virtual, through in-person, um, through open forums.
We will meet with people where they are.
So I'll give you an example.
We had a, a search we did in South Carolina.
They had a large Native American population.
We made arrangements to go visit them on the reservation.
We went to them because we wanted to get their perspective
and make sure that the superintendent
that serves their children is, is the right fit
and has the right skills and disposition.
So, um, we are very transparent.
One of the things I, I also liked from, um, uh, my pro the,
uh, from Nsda was they said,
put this on your district calendar,
that your district website,
that's a hundred percent accurate.
You know, you want to have absolute transparency.
You want people to know how they're gonna have the
opportunity to be involved, how they're gonna be able
to say, you know, participate in this process.
And, and we want them to be actively engaged.
It's not just sent Yeah, I sent out the survey.
You didn't take the chance to fill it out.
We, we are very, very, we're almost, um,
we're obsessed about making sure we get people's input,
um, into this process.
Another way that we do that is
through, uh, thought exchange.
Have you have, has anybody here heard of thought exchange?
Oh, you have? Okay. Do you use it as a district
Y Yeah.
Yes, you can talk with Annie up there.
So, but, but definitely,
and we started to use
that in our last superintendent evaluation, uh, prior
to the, the exit.
But that's, so Adrian
and I both have a, some, some experience with thought
Exchange. Okay. And if
you want, you could, yeah, I'm glad he's using,
you could scan that QR code.
This is a sample of what we would do.
And we do this sort of on top of that entire week
of stakeholder engagement.
Uh, so if anybody has a cell phone
and you wanna scan that QR code,
you can actually participate in a sample, um, process where,
where we would gather some feedback.
The first thing to know if you're not familiar with it,
is it's, um, it's available in a hundred native languages.
I don't know that all those languages would be needed in,
in your community, but, um, any,
anybody can open up the survey in their native language,
respond in their native language to the question, which,
and it's usually a single question, like,
what do you want a senior next superintendent?
Those ideas that they prepare, that they provide are,
um, put up in the cloud.
They're translated by other people who will, um, get
to read them in their own native language.
And then you get to rank how much you agree
or disagree with each of those comments.
And then it's meritocracy.
The, the, the comments that have the most merit,
that have the most weight, that have the most, um, value
to the members of the community that are reading it,
get raised up to the top and get more attention.
So, um, it's not, what this does is it avoids the, the,
the typical, um, challenge, especially in public meetings,
which is the, somebody with a, um, a loud voice,
even if they're a minority, uh, may outweigh
and, and, and speak over.
The majority of that is silent.
That chooses not to participate.
So this, this gives everybody the opportunity.
It's multilingual, it's, um, anonymous, uh,
but it gives incredible feedback.
So, we'll, we, we did a search, uh,
or we did a, uh, a thought exchange for a,
a community a little smaller than this,
and they had over 10,000, um, you know, you know, uh,
star ratings or ratings, which is just a tremendous amount
of, of good data, good feedback to get.
Um, all of this information is used to create,
and again, this is, I think a, um, I know, um,
I believe the, uh,
NASDAQ mentioned they do a leadership profile.
And I have a, I pulled up a sample,
which I'll show you and I could email it to you.
It's also on our website for candidates
to look at if you wanted to go
to our website and look at it yourself.
But, um, we create a very, um, deep leadership profile
that identifies all the data that we collected
through the process of the engagement.
And again, that's virtual meetings with.
So for instance, with teachers, we'll offer two sessions,
an in-person session and a virtual session.
We'll work with your administration
to determine the best time, be via contact contract matters
to that, we should offer it to them.
Um, you know, you, you could put it in an obscure time
and you don't get a lot of participation.
So we're very mindful of that and conscientious about that.
Um, all the data that we get is put into this leadership
profile, and it really creates a picture of what, um, um,
what this community wants in their next superintendent.
Another piece of this is something
that we call the personas.
And I don't know if you got a chance to look at it. I do.
Um, but we've come up with six, um, uh, personas that
define the different types of superintendent, um, skills
or dispositions you could say, uh, that exist.
Now, as a board, you probably would love to have
a superintendent that can embody all six of these.
The chances are that that person doesn't exist.
Um, and so, um, what we do
with this is we ask the board to think,
and we ask the community to think through, um,
at this given point in time, what persona is most important
for your community right now.
So, um, you know, in, in, in some cases, we would work
with a, with a district,
and the superintendent had been there 25 years
and they named the auditorium after them.
And, you know, that's a different
situation than your situation.
And different than any very different,
very different, very different.
Yeah. So, so you might need somebody
that can help manage a crisis.
You might need somebody that can help
bring the community back together.
And so all this is, it's, it doesn't, it's not a, a
selection, um, mechanism.
It's a, it's a lens through which we encourage the board
to look, uh, at candidates.
And I think that's to my earlier point about, um,
how we might, if we were chosen, how we might come up
with a different pool of candidates,
because we use this as a tool.
Lemme tell you a little, just a little piece about this too.
So we create the leadership profile,
and we ask in the thought exchange for all the members
of the community to rank from one to six, which
of the personas they feel is most important.
We ask 'em to put it in order.
We don't put that information in the leadership profile.
It's not in the leadership profile.
And there's a very specific reason.
What we do is when we have them fill out an application,
there's a writing section,
and they have to write, which persona do you think
best represent you?
So as a board, when you're reviewing applicants,
you're getting to look at their sort of, you know,
unfiltered, their genuine, um,
belief about their leadership qualities.
And then you as a board can compare that with the community
and what you believe the community needs.
So that blind, uh, feedback is just, is just very powerful.
It can affirm, it could surprise you.
Um, and, um, and that's, that's how we do that.
It's another lens we use to look through, um, in terms
of finding the ideal candidate.
Um, again, different in terms of some
of the specifics of our process.
So we, we will, we,
we don't give you all of the applicants.
So, uh, we, our approach, our belief is
that you're hiring a firm because you're,
and you, you may be experts in education, I don't know,
but many boards are not educators then of themselves.
And so you're hiring experts to identify what,
what a superintendent, what they can do,
and what they should do for your community.
And so we narrow all of the applicants down to a slate
of about eight to 10 candidates.
We then ask each of the candidates to record a 92nd video
and, and answer the question why they feel called
to South Portland.
And, um, and then we give, when we, we have a, a, a,
a meeting with you all, we've given you all
of their applications, which includes their cover letter,
their application, their resume, their transcripts, letters
of recommendation, et cetera.
And we have you watch those videos.
And then we do a process where we help identify
who are the five to seven best candidates from
that slate of eight to 10.
And those become your semifinalists.
And that's the first step that you go through
where you actually interview candidates in person.
And then we, um, we do a, a board prep.
Um, we make sure, like I said, through our approach that,
you know, concierge level, we want you to look good in,
in front of your, uh, in front of these candidates, one
of which will probably be your superintendent.
Uh, we train you on ethical and legal implications.
We talk about bias
and how that needs to be addressed in the interview process,
and we guide you.
So unlike I, we take a different approach, not right
or wrong, it's for you to decide what you prefer,
but we will work with your board to help ensure
that there is consensus on the candidate.
The worst thing that can happen,
and in my opinion, is
that a superintendent is offered a position
and the vote is four three in favor.
We, we believe very deeply that there should not be
unanimity of thought.
You have to have diverse opinions and points of view,
but you need to work that out
and reach consensus, consensus being defined
as the will.
You know, all the, all the opinions,
all the thoughts have been heard.
Um, and every, every, you know,
conversation has been exhausted.
But the will of the group is evident even to the one who
disagrees most with the decision.
And we're willing as a group to move forward
and select a candidate.
That's when our work is done.
It's when we feel that the, the board
and is in a place where they have found a superintendent
that meets, uh, their expectations, their criteria,
and that they can fully support, uh,
that their first day may,
it shouldn't be a fourth three vote,
or a, I don't, I think you have nine,
so it shouldn't be a No, we have seven.
Oh, you have seven. Oh, you do. Okay. Okay. Didn't rep.
Yeah. Okay. Okay, got it.
So, um, we are really, we, we,
we facilitate those conversations
and they're difficult conversations
because you're all different.
You all different represent different groups
and have different experiences, but our goal
and our work with you is to bring you to
that point at which you can, you can,
you can come to consensus.
Um, we,
and just in, just as an example, in terms of, you know,
our approach and, and what it's yielded.
Um, we had a search in,
in South Carolina that I mentioned earlier.
We had 25 candidates, um, from 17 states across the country.
That's a phenomenal representation.
Um, and the way we do that is
because, um, of our, so our firm,
we have 130 people on our team that are current
and former superintendents.
When we have a position, we let the community,
our community know, they send out messages to people
that they know that could
or should be looking at the leadership profile.
Um, we use, if you want, we use, um, we a a SA as a, um,
um, a, uh, an advertising tool.
But the word is already out when, you know, positions,
it doesn't, um, you know, every,
everybody knows when positions because of social media and,
and, and Google alerts and whatnot.
So, uh, but we, we do recommend doing that.
And, um, and for instance,
I'm going on a flight tomorrow morning to, um, Orlando, uh,
for a conference called M-C-E-L-M, cell, it's Men
of Color in Education Leadership.
I'm gonna be talking about 300 candidates
for superintendent positions that are up
and coming, ambitious, uh, men of color that wanna just,
you know, change the world and, uh,
and believe that they have the support to do so.
So, um, that's how we get candidates.
And then the most important is
that we have, we wanna, we wanna feel like there,
there's a relationship that is built on a foundation
of trust between the board and you
and the, between the superintendent and the board.
Um, we recommend, we can't mandate it, uh,
that you do a board retreat with the new superintendent
and have one of our, one
of the people on our team facilitate that
to really establish clear expectations.
Um, and regardless, we do, uh, offer one month
of executive coaching.
We do, uh, an entry plan with the superintendent.
We review all of the thought exchange
and the, uh, data, kind of like was mentioned here.
We do that. It's all included within their month
of executive coaching.
Uh, it's more than a check-in. It's, it's a legitimate.
Like, let's let, let's, you know, help you figure out
where your first step is gonna be.
And here are some of the pitfalls that we heard through
our conversations with the community.
And we spent a whole week, you know, 45 hours doing that.
Uh, we've got great insights that we wanna share with
that superintendent, make sure that he
or she is, is successful.
So, um, yeah.
So I think that's, that's the, those are the differences.
And I'll just show you this, this is an example
of the report, um, for the, uh,
that we literally just published.
Um, just to give you a sense for
what this document looks like.
Um, you know, we go through,
we talk about all the stakeholders.
Um, we talk about, um, you know, what we found
that's unique to the district.
Um, we ask five, we ask four
or five questions across every group that we meet with.
The questions are, what are the best
kind of similar, what are the best things?
Uh, what things need to change?
What should be the change priority?
And what do we need to know that we didn't ask?
Um, we provide these, this is interesting.
So this is from, like, we give you the top, um,
10 thoughts that were expressed
through throughout exchange CLC.
Like, these were, these are verbatims.
Like they're looking for somebody with integrity,
because based on their prior situation, uh,
they felt that that didn't exist.
That became a very, very, um,
consistent thread leadership throughout.
We do a SWOT analysis, um,
and I think this is, this is pretty, pretty interesting.
Something we, that we're doing for the first time.
It's a letter to the future superintendent.
It's unaddressed. Um,
but it's written in a tone that is really intended to
invite candidates that are going
to read the leadership profile, read this letter
and say, this is where I wanna spend my next five to 10,
maybe hopefully 20 years.
Mm-hmm. Um, and,
and that's how we, that's our passion is,
is finding that match.
So, uh, that's, that's it.
Questions, uh, uh, member Dowling,
Thank you. And thank
you Dr. Melendez for coming up here.
And, uh, yeah. Whether
or not withstanding getting to, uh, visit our district,
I had a question about the, the superintendent personas,
those six Yep.
Types of superintendents that you, you find to exist.
Um, how did you come up with those, develop those?
Um, I would say,
and this is actually only a portion of it, you can actually,
if I think in the proposal, you,
if you can see there's like the pros and cons of each.
Mm-hmm. This was done in collaboration with my team.
We just said, what are some of the, um, what are some
of the, the different types of issues
that school districts face mm-hmm.
And boards face, and what type of leader is needed in that,
um, in that type of situation,
because you could be the most visionary
superintendent, phenomenal in one district,
and go to another district that doesn't need a visionary
and not be successful.
It's not the superintendent, it's the match.
And so what our approach, we want to,
we wanna help find that match.
That's what we are sort of banking on.
And this is just a, you know, um, how,
how exactly did it come together?
Uh, I don't remember exactly.
Lots of conversations and, and, and polishing and,
and thinking, great.
But yeah, it is, if it's on our website though,
if you do wanna look more closely at some of the things,
because here, lemme give you an example.
Like the instructional leader.
So some districts will say, well, we have
to improve our test scores.
So an instructional leader, somebody with like,
maybe a background as a chief academic officer
or assistant superintendent for curriculum will come in
and they'll have great instructional knowledge
and strategies,
but that person is not gonna necessarily be as strong in
building with the community because their
focus is on instruction.
So you have to know that. And
so setting the right expectation as a board for
who do you need right now is critical
and, and discerning that.
So like it's, we are very, you know, clear
that there are some things that these people have,
but there are things that they won't have as a result.
'cause No, nobody's Perfect.
Thank you. I, I also have a question about, uh, one
of the pages in your proposal is the one
that says concierge service at the very top.
Yeah. And there are three columns.
Uh, there's the column that lays out
what your organization does, a column that lays out
what the board does, and then the third column
that says we do, does that mean those are things that Zeal
and the school board does together?
Yes. Okay. I just wanted
to make sure I was understanding that. Yep,
Exactly. And so you'll
see like interview, semi-finalist,
interview finalists, negotiate, like those are the things
that we collaborate on.
Gotcha. But yeah, we try to delineate very clearly
what our responsibilities, what your responsibilities are,
and what we do collectively.
Great. Thank you. Uh, member Smith,
Um, can you talk a little bit more about
what you mentioned, um, closer
to the beginning about the board being kind of the primary
decision makers and, and not having a selection committee
similar to what NASDAQ would have?
Absolutely. So as a board, you have two responsibilities.
One is to hire the superintendent,
and the second is to adopt policy.
That's really it. This is pass the
Budget.
Well, so you have to endorse a budget
that the superintendent recommends to you, but Right.
But it is ultimately as a, as a member of the board, it is,
you know, the entire community's job to pass a budget.
So the, this is the only hiring
decision you get to make as a board.
And I think it's the most important
and critical relationship in a school district.
Mm-hmm. If you look at school districts that succeed, it's
where there is,
and I don't mean when I say a good relationship,
I don't mean a rubber stamp or lack of challenge.
It's where there is trust.
There's, I mean, and,
and you can speak to your interim superintendent,
and you can probably have experienced what it isn't like
what it, how it's not good when there
is an absence of trust.
But that relationship is critical.
And, and I would not as a board abdicate that responsibility
to any other group other than, um,
other than yourselves to make the decision.
And so, in, in our model, we want you to see the eight
to 10 candidates that we recommend for the slate.
We want you to see their videos.
We want you to talk, because it's the process.
It's the journey, and it's the
deliberation that's so critical.
Why this one? Why not that one?
Because you're, you're coming to consensus
as you narrow down the candidates.
And we help you in that process, in those, in those meetings
to, to come
to those realizations together collectively about
who your next superintendent needs to be.
And so to just, it's, it's not a, i i,
it's, it's so important.
I just can't imagine it not being done by you. Mm-hmm.
Um, and then to follow up a little bit, can you, uh,
share, or do you know of any experiences,
your process is a lot more defined in terms of, uh,
how many candidates we're seeing
and kind of working through that process.
Have, have you had an experience where
they didn't ultimately choose from the 10 candidates
that you chose, uh, and had to restart that process?
And even if you haven't seen it, what, what would that,
you know, how would you approach that? Yeah,
So it's in, it's interesting, I'll, I'll,
I won't say the district name,
but I will, I will give you an example of, of a situation
that I, that I was very worried about in the moment.
So we presented this slate of candidates,
and there was one member of the board
that said, I don't like any of them.
And I was like, oh.
I looked at my two colleagues, I was like, oh my gosh,
what, what's going on here?
And, um, they, they actually asked us to leave.
They had a conversation privately, so I don't know
what was said, but I,
we came back in and we were like, we're ready to go.
So it took about 30 minutes. They got themselves calibrated,
and then they made a decision.
Um, we recommend this process,
and just to show you that we are flexible
and we're adaptable, um,
and we're responsive to current needs.
Um, we had the semi-final interviews,
seven candidates we had planned,
and we had a whole detailed timeline for when the, when
that would be narrowed down.
And this board decided, the seventh candidate
that they saw was the superintendent.
They didn't want to even have a final round interview.
And they, and we were like, okay.
So I call,
I like literally called him while he was on his way home.
I was like, stop, like, are you,
are you serious about this job?
And we had a and we literally like, you know,
brought 'em back in and, and, and they love him, you know,
and it's like, so yeah.
That's, that's an example of
where it didn't go as I scripted.
Um, but it went the right way.
And that's what's most important.
Any other questions? I, uh,
member Richardson, and then Holman.
Thank you. Um, I, I, I like
your, I think your argument is compelling as to why
the board should be sort of the selection team, so to speak.
But, um, you know, I think members of our community are kind
of expecting to be involved, um,
or that there's, um, going to be
an opportunity for stakeholder
engagement kind of at that level.
So, uh, um, you know, we walked, you walked us
through thought exchange, and I may have missed, and I,
and I, you know, and you said you're obsessed about getting
people's input, which I love.
And, and you'll help us kind of digest that it sounds like.
But what opportunities are you going to help? Yeah.
You've, we've got the people-centric meetings.
Can you walk us through a bit what those would look like
and how those would be structured?
Because that, to me seems like the only other mechanism
to engage Yeah. With stakeholders.
Yep. So, so here's the thing.
The way it's part of it is the way we frame it. So mm-hmm.
When we, if we're engaged, we have a letter
that we'll send out, that'll be something like, uh, we're
so thrilled to be working with the South Portland Board
and to help you find your next superintendent and, and act.
Actually, I could show you, I could show you the language
from, it's actually in our, in here.
If you, if you read this first, um, trying
to zoom in a little bit, a
Bigger, bigger, it's easier back here.
Uh, Oh. Yeah. There we go. It's easier, it's
Easier to look back here. So,
so I, I identify
because this task is the boards alone,
and there's no obligation to seek input.
And this is your consultant saying it.
So we, we can take the heat on this,
But we recognize that for boards that choose
to not inc include their community, it,
it presents a number of problems.
And there are significant advantages to doing it.
But the way we frame it in our communication is, here is how
your voice will be heard.
We promise you that your voice will be
taken into consideration.
It may not be in the way that you had anticipated,
but even if you do that
and you have a, a small committee, you're really only
satisfying five people in your community.
And that's not gonna make a difference.
My belief is that, you know, taking the position
that the board has retained experts
to guide you through this process.
You're following our recommendations,
and here's how we want to engage you.
And here's the opportunity.
And it's a whole week's worth of engagement.
And by the way, you do thought exchange too. I mean mm-hmm.
We'll, we'll literally sit down
and ask you what groups do we need to connect with.
Mm-hmm. Um, I have, we're doing a, a search,
we just started a search in Stanford, Connecticut,
very high profile district.
Um, I'm meeting with each
president of each of the five unions.
We're meeting with each of the unions themselves.
We're meeting with different representatives from every
community interest group.
So we will go to whatever extent is necessary
to engage your community and, and satisfy their urge
and their need to express what they're feeling.
We just don't believe that time for that is in interviews
because they don't know.
Like, think about it, think about the amount of work
and time you spend as a board.
You are more aware
of issues than any employee in this district
except a superintendent.
I mean, you have a global view of things that are happening.
You're hearing from the community,
you're hearing from your administrators,
you're hearing from your, uh, your children in many cases.
So you need to make this decision is, is my feeling.
And I'll defend that. Now, if you do want to,
and we do, we do this occasionally.
If you want to, um, have like
for the last three finalists, or two
or three finalists, you wanna have a
community engagement piece.
Mm-hmm. That's good.
But, but I would structure it a very specific way.
You do not want to have a vote.
Like, this is the one we want.
This is first, second, third, because mm-hmm.
You know, obviously for obvious
reasons that that's a problem.
Um, yeah.
Uh, further questions. You, you can, you can hold.
I'm gonna,
Yeah. I'll, I'll, uh, member
Rich,
I think we're gonna go to, uh, oh, I'm sorry.
I do have a comment. Oh, go
Ahead. Let him go ahead. Let him go ahead. Oh,
okay.
You're correct. Thank you.
One of the more rewarding parts of my, you know,
short tenure was talking to people, getting out
and talking to just cons, constituents, hearing them
independently bring up things.
I'm not a big fan of gizmos and polls and social media.
Could you win me over somehow?
'cause I think this thought exchange could be the loudest
voice heard, the loudest voice voted on the loudest voice
progressed to some sort of, uh, immediacy.
But I think it's more important to reach out to people
who may not want to talk, who, who are kind of like
in the shadows because they're not
necessarily part of the group.
Do you have any comments on that? Hmm.
That's great. I would say, I would say thought exchange
allows, first of all, scale.
So it gives everybody, even if they don't, to our chagrin,
choose to engage, it gives everybody the opportunity.
It's in every native Lang a hundred native languages.
So you can't offer that as an individual
unless you speak a hundred languages.
Yeah. Understand. To engage people at that level.
So I think that's one, I think another is people like
to be more candid when they're anonymous unless,
Or maybe not as serious.
What's That? Or maybe not as serious, so.
Okay. Fair enough.
Um, one of the things,
and they, they actually mentioned this, um, um,
NASDAQ I think mentioned that they will screen inappropriate
comments that happens automatically through this platform.
It'll, it'll send me a, a, a list of comments
that are inappropriate every day,
and we check whether should this be included or not.
And, and,
but they get flagged so we can ex, you know,
extinguish those negative and inappropriate comments.
Um, but it's only one, it's only one
of the tools we're using.
So remember, we're using, um, individual,
we're gonna meet individually with each board member
for 45 minutes, right.
We're gonna meet in person. We could do an in-person focus.
I mean, look at this facility.
It'd be great to have this room filled up with people
that want to talk about what they
wanna see in their next superintendent.
So it's a matter of, you know, who's
Chosen to be here, who's heard about it, you know?
Yeah. And, and that's where, like, why we try
to make mm-hmm.
Um, we would work with your district, we'd work with,
if you have a communications person, we would leverage your,
um, you know, your social not well,
if you have social media, I assume you do some social media
outreach, email outreach, text messages.
Um, the thought exchange is a QR code.
It could also be sent as an email link.
We can create, um, sort of visuals like that.
Like we're listening. Like, we want to hear from you.
We'll create that on your behalf to,
to send that out visually.
Um, it's hard.
And, and it's, it's often, honestly, it's,
I think it's disappointing because people,
and this is, it's a frustration,
but they'll, they'll, they'll say, we didn't know that.
You know, it's like, we try so hard.
Um, and so some of it is on people to be aware,
but we will work with you to, to get as much
out of the community as we can.
So, Jeff, I wanna go to, uh, yeah, thank you, Claire.
But to follow up on what George just asked, if,
for example, you know, we have part of this community
that is, uh, more marginalized.
It's on the west side of the city.
Um, is that, is that a situation where you would go to that?
Yeah. You know, you would go there
and try to hold some gathering there?
Yeah, I, I mean, 'cause they're not gonna come here,
Right? And, and
some groups don't feel comfortable in
schools, right?
They might not, I mean, especially with some of the things
that are happening, um, they're afraid.
So you tell me, I was just at Willow, Willow Pizza, uh, you,
I had Willow Pizza today.
Hey, there's tables in there. Let's set up a table.
If that's where you think people will come, let's do it.
You know, like we, we just want to hear from them.
And, and here's the thing that this does is, and it offsets.
So like, the, the concern about
people in the community are expecting
to be part of the process.
Our goal is to make this a, a real, um,
we want to, we wanna do, uh,
we wanna make the board look good in the eyes
of the community that we're doing sort of like PR for you.
We're the board.
The board instructed us to come
and sit at this table at Willow Pizza
because they want to hear your voice.
So that's the way we present it on your behalf.
Like you engaged us to do this for you.
Um, so that's, you know, that's how we do it.
Member Holman. Um, so I just, I looked at your page,
um, with, uh, the, the, the, the, uh, kind
of the process line.
Yeah. And could you, could you attach that to actual, like,
type type amount of time we're talking?
Is it a, typically, how much time does this take?
Um, it, it will, the way we re reverse engineer it,
so you tell us the date
that you want the superintendent to start.
I assume July 1st, like the other firms mentioned,
if you say we want to appoint them by April
or May, uh, then we just work backwards.
So we do a, um, we create a shared document
with your committee that is very transparent.
And we will list, we have like a, a table
that lists all the dates
that things are happening in chronological order.
Um, and then we just build the calendar
backwards from the goal.
And it sometimes requires some compromise, right?
Like, maybe we're not gonna have three weeks
between the semi-final and the final interviews.
Maybe it's gonna be the same week.
There's nothing that says you can't do that, you know?
Um, but it's, it's not traditional. It's traditional.
Wait like a month, and then they get a job somewhere else.
You're like, what happened?
Oh, I got a job 'cause I was waiting a month.
That's frustrating. If you're a
candidate, you don't wanna wait a month.
Mm-hmm. So we're, we're flexible that way.
We, we work with the boards to, you know, do things in a way
that, you know,
is gonna make the most sense, we think. Okay.
Thank you. Uh, member Dally.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Rich's comments actually made me think of something
that I hadn't been thinking of before.
So I appreciate that he brought that up.
Um, I do have a little bit of experience
with thought exchange, and I, in general, I, I like
and enjoy technology,
but, um, I also know a lot of people who, uh,
either don't have access to technology
or, um, you know, there may be reasons
that they're unable to use it.
Like they're, they might be visually impaired, for example.
Um, so I'm trying to think as, as I'm,
as I'm hearing all this, um, ways to, to reach those folks.
I'm also thinking about, um, some
of the families in my district who, uh, there might be one
technology device in the whole family,
and it might be, uh, the high school students' iPad
that the student's parents don't know how to use a phone.
You know, or, or, you know, the parents might have a phone,
but it might not have data.
I mean, those, those are real things that exist in,
in our community, especially in my district.
Um, so, uh, I, I don't know.
I, I, I mean, you, you've sort of already answered it, so I,
I don't know if I necessarily have a, a question,
but I'm sort of Yeah.
Hoping to put that on your radar a little bit as something
to, to think about. Um,
I'd never, I'd never thought of that.
What did we did? We did think about when we were meet, I met
with Stanford on Saturday, this past Saturday,
and we were talking about senior citizens.
I was like, let's go to their, you know,
wherever they hang out, like, and play cards and stuff.
Let's go there and say, Hey, we'd like to talk to you
and engage them in, in their location.
So, um, we, we need the local context from you. Mm-hmm.
You know, this community, we don't in the same way.
So if you were to say, Jeff,
I think it would be helpful if we did this, we'll do it so
that we can get that voice.
Um,
Thank you. That's good
to hear. Thank you.
Uh, did you have another question? Member Richardson.
Um, uh, I mean, I'll ask you
to see if you can give me a slightly different answer in
terms of, um, how, you know,
I think you sat here, you've, you've heard us ask, um,
how you make sure that you're, you know,
reaching candidates nationally that, um, you know, kind
of are interested in, um,
leading our diverse community.
And, and, and, and it seems as if that's important to you.
I mean, you mentioned what you're doing tomorrow in Florida
and the call you're participating in.
And, um,
but I'd love to hear your kind of response to, to that
because, um, it is still a, a fairly,
you know, uh, white dominated industry for,
um, administrators.
And, um, not to say that a,
that a white administrator can't, you know Right.
Isn't the right choice either.
I'm not saying that at all, um,
because of the values that that person might have.
'cause that's, that's the most important thing.
But, but we are a unique community in Maine.
Um, I mean, somewhat similar to Portland,
but, you know, we're just, um, and,
and I think that that presents really, um,
I an, an important op presents opportunity,
but also challenges for kind of understanding how
to navigate a community that's not all the same.
So yeah, it's, I don't know.
I don't know that I, I have the answer to the question
about how we attract candidates that
are of a certain demographic themselves.
I think what's more important than
where I would spend my time focusing is on the,
the type of leader that you need, regardless of their
background or credentials or anything.
I'll give you, I'll give you an example.
I'll give you two examples. One is, I was doing a search,
and, uh, they were, the, the board was like, we're tired
of getting the same results all the time.
Get us an army general.
Like, that's who we need to lead our schools.
We need an army general.
Somebody that's gonna just take charge and, right.
So they, so I was like, all right. I was like, thank you.
I'll put this on indeed.
We'll put it, we'll like, send it up.
Like, we'll, and we got some pretty interesting candidates.
Um, they didn't hire an army general, by the way.
They hired a very, uh, lovely, um,
lady about four foot eight probably. Um,
Who could be an Army general too.
It could Oh, oh geez. Yeah. I apologize. I apologize.
You're absolutely right. I,
oh, I walked right into that one.
Um, but, but really what's important is the personas.
And here's the, the other example I'll give you is the
feedback that we get from Candidates.
Even candidates. 'cause we talked
to the candidates, we debrief with them.
Um, what, tell us about the process,
what was good about it was what could have been better, even
to the people that didn't get the job, obviously,
especially those, and they, they tell us consistently
that the leadership profile made them really,
really wanna work in that district
because it, it captured the essence of the district in a way
that they had not
before seen in their, sort of, in their career.
You know, where, where it just, it's
so personalized, um, and unique.
Now it's gonna, it's gonna follow a similar format.
I don't wanna give you that sense, but it's gonna be
uniquely derived for this community.
And hopefully have the voice.
And then, by the way, um, you
as a board would, would approve it.
And just kind of like Nasdaq said, like, you'll approve it.
And, and that will become the tool that we use to attract
and evaluate candidates.
Thank you. Yeah. I, it's not really a question,
but I really appreciate you showing that
leadership profile example.
And, um, you know, one
of the things we talked about when we, uh,
we're interviewing with George is, is coming up
with a strategic plan, which we, which we've gotten a little
distracted and things are, um, you know, just,
he's only here for a short year.
But yeah, you know, that, that working on that
content will not only help us find a superintendent,
it'll help us, you know, really understand the direction
that we need to go
and what we need to be focusing on as a board,
because we don't really have that kind of a focus yet.
Yeah. This, so the, we, we, the foundation
of a strategic plan,
'cause we do those as well, would be a SWOT analysis.
And so we provide in that leadership profile a SWOT analysis
that would be the foundation for, um, that's great.
You know, some of those things. And that's why, you know,
we really think this, you know, it's powerful.
It's powerful because a superintendent
who then is gonna do an entry plan has all this sort
of background information about the district
and knows how to curate questions
and, um, you know, fill in the gaps.
And I think that would benefit all of us. Really. Yeah.
Sorry, what'd you say? It would benefit all of us.
That information my, yeah. I'm thinking myself especially.
Mm-hmm. Yep. Other questions?
Uh, member Dowling,
One of the other firms that, uh, is, is hoping to, um,
get hired by us for this job, uh, mentioned
that when they do surveys, they strive to get about,
um, they look at the enrollment, uh, in the school district,
and they say, based on your enrollment, we strive to get
12.5% of that in responses.
So for us, we have about 2,700 students enrolled.
That'd be like 340 responses.
Um, do you, do you use some kind of metric
to create a, a goal for the number of responses you have?
Or do you just, you know, try your hardest to get as many
as you can, which I also think would be valid,
but, um, how, how do you approach that
and what do you consider, uh, you know, a good amount
of responses or an insufficient amount?
Yeah, that's a, that's great.
You know, I think back to 2004 when I wrote my dissertation
and, you know, I sent out, we had to do it by mail,
like physically, like we had a survey, had
to put a self-addressed stamp envelope
and send it out and hope it came back.
And I mean, if I got back 20%, I was like, over the moon.
Um, I, I don't know.
So this district has about 1600, um, people,
and we had 900, but a lot of it was because of students.
I would say participation was a lot,
it was disappointing here.
Um, but we had in thought exchange, we had 460 participants
who shared 422 independent responses,
and that had over 10,000 li, you know, like, um,
star ratings.
Mm-hmm. Um, I don't know.
I can't do the calculation on top of my head,
but 12% might not be a bad
goal. You know, I think
It's hard to get people to answer this.
It's, it's sad,
but I think we have to, you know, I, I think we we're,
we're, we're doing everything we can.
And if, if another firm has an idea
that gets more responses,
I'm gonna steal it and we're gonna do it. So,
Yeah. They don't
say how they get to 12%. Oh, okay.
They just say that's their, that's their
standard. Thank you.
Yeah. Uh, I wouldn't be worried so
Much, much about the responses.
You, you wonder about specificity
and, uh, sensitivity in a, in a survey.
And, uh, I would just look at how the,
the graph sort of populates.
I saw one graph in here
that was just basically straight across, just like,
no, where was that graph?
Yep. Um, so
Here's when things start to matter.
If you look at a Pareto of the answers, for instance,
you know, staff morale four, you know,
So yeah, there's Miscellaneous.
Okay, miscellaneous. Okay.
But here you've got a, a poll that wasn't very, I,
I would just say not very useful.
It's not d differentiating.
Help me understand what, what you mean.
I know What he means. How much more important is staff
morale than academic excellence?
It's just getting a real true sort of measure of your,
what you're trying to, it's data quality.
Yeah. You know, and if this is really
what people are thinking, I don't care between any one
of these if they show up.
So I, yeah, I think I, I think I agree
with you exactly what you're saying.
What's different about this Yeah.
Is, um, these, these themes, yeah.
Staff morale, teacher support came up organically,
not from a checklist.
Oh. So a lot of surveys that are distributed,
It was inferred from their res
verbal response. Would you say
They were? Yes. So
they're, so that's what thought exchange trust
Aggregation. Yeah.
Yeah. So it takes their response to like,
these are the verbatims. See,
This is what I don't like, so
Oh, okay.
Um, so it takes their verbal, their, their verbatim Yeah.
Responses. And it magically puts them into themes
and categories, and then it ranks those themes.
Yeah. Versus me giving you
what are the top 10 most important attributes
you want your superintendent.
Yeah. Choose five, you know, here's the top 10, choose five,
you know, honesty, integrity, like
of course that, that's meaningless.
But these are actual themes that came from I understand
that single question.
What do you wanna see in your next superintendent? Yeah.
I'm interested in the answers that say duplicitous
through leadership.
You know, talk to that person, see what happened, what are,
what are you talking about there?
You know, just sensational words like that.
Well, so in this one, if you read the report Yeah.
It'll, it'll make absolute sense. Okay.
And because the, the, the situation they've been
through. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So,
But it's like gravity. Yeah.
Yeah. But thank you for,
For my No, fair enough. Good questions.
Opportunity to ask. Yeah.
I think I asked, um, Jeff, I had a couple things.
Um, one was, I noted that
you had a team of four people assigned to this,
and, uh, and two of them were people of color.
And so how do you use the four people, um,
in doing something where, you know, someone else has
basically one or maybe two.
Um, and so, so how do you involve all those people in,
in being part of this, which I think would be great,
but I'm just trying to understand.
Uh, so you mean, I think you mean like,
how do we, how do we deploy the people on our team? Yeah.
Well, well, I mean, you know,
you have clearly have a big staff,
but you, it looks like from here that you chose four people
who you would put on this team if you were selected.
So then I'm wondering, what do those,
how do those four people, you know,
do they work independently?
Do they work together? Did and Yeah.
And how do you incorporate that?
Yeah, it's actually, it's actually the opposite.
It's, I say, Hey,
I've got this opportunity, who's interested?
And so I develop my, i, I form teams
based on the pool of people that I have.
And, and sometimes in making selections,
it's about geography.
So like, um, Peter is two hours away. I'm four hours away.
I'm driving back tonight. You know, like, so to, so a lot of
that is some planning.
Mm-hmm. Um, and some of it's intentional about like,
knowing some of the local context.
Um, I don't think it, you know, so anyway, um,
so I guess what we would do is, and I, this is on me.
I would facilitate a, a conversation with,
these are the groups that people are going,
these are the groups that we wanna see and talk to.
And I'd say to my team, okay, let's figure out
who the best people to talk to these groups are.
So I'll give you another example.
Might be a little easier because of a language.
So, in Stanford, I have, um, a female, um,
Latina or Latina female.
I have a, uh, African American gentleman.
I have, and myself, and I forgot who the other one is.
I have about four. And oh, I have a, an attorney
that's also Latino.
There's a large Spanish speaking community. Mm-hmm.
So they're bilingual. Mm-hmm.
So they're gonna do the bilingual communities
and Spanish speaking communities.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Which is large portion.
So it's, sometimes it's just like logical.
Thank you. Um, and if I'm understanding in your,
in your fee proposal, you recommend, uh, a couple of things
that, that, and they're extra fees.
But you recommend, uh, third party advertising,
which is the national advertising?
If that's if I'm correct. Yeah.
Um, so if we were interested in a, in a,
in a broader look, you recommend that.
And the other thing is the third party criminal, financial,
and social media background.
Uh, and you only recommend that with the finalists?
Correct. Okay. It's just because of cost. Yes.
Um, so, you know, some, some boards will do that
with all three of the finalists
because they don't want to narrow it down
to the one candidate and find out they had a DUI, you know?
Yeah. Um, by the way,
besides all of that stuff, we do a lot of our own
checking because of our network.
Um, so we will speak to people that
are not on the reference list.
We will leverage our, you know, our network to, I, you know,
learn about candidates.
And we're very careful in
who we would present to you to begin with.
Um, and if there is a history, which, you know,
su superintendents are human too, they make mistakes, um,
we would be very upfront with you about sort of a situation
and, and just be candid and let you know about that.
Thank you. And, um, so you said there's one month of,
uh, mentorship that's kind of part of your package,
and then if the board were interested in more mentoring
beyond that, or a retreat with the, with the board,
that you would be available to do that?
Yes. Yes. Yeah, we would,
ideally we would have somebody from
my, from the search team.
It probably would not be me,
but it would be some, I've done that so many times.
I'm so sorry. Um, somebody, uh,
from the search team would, would do that.
Um, we also, we don't assign a coach, um,
if you wanted to go with coaching beyond the one month,
which we recommend, um, we wanna have a conversation
with the superintendent to make sure it's a fit.
We don't wanna just impose, like,
this person was on the search
team, this is gonna be your coach.
Mm-hmm. This who you're gonna trust.
And so I've had situations where, um, you know, the,
the superintendent had a person that they'd been working
with for five years
and will facilitate those, those things into it.
Build it into it. That was a district where they,
that prepaid for the whole package.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um, they wanted a full year,
and then the superintendent wanted somebody
that wasn't on our team originally, and we worked it out.
So we can do that.
Um, my last question, I might as well ask you,
because you heard me ask it to the other two, uh, people,
and that's what, what would you say is your short suit?
You know, what, where, where would you say if you were going
to change something or add something
or improve something, or where, what would that be?
Yeah. Um, I did, I did have the advantage
of giving some thought to that question.
Actually. I was sitting there. And here's,
here's something I would say is, um,
we, we often wanna continue to, we don't like change.
We wanna continue doing the same thing
that we've been doing, but we want a different
result that doesn't work.
And I think for a long time, for, you know,
if you look at education as an industry versus medicine
as an industry, a classroom today looks very much like it
did 150 years ago.
And thank God
medical practice looks nothing like it looked 150 years ago.
And, and I think if the, the one, the weakness is
how do, how can I, if I wanna make a, a dent in education
with our company, how do I get boards
and communities to understand
that the superintendency is an incredibly complex role.
Mm-hmm. The board relationship
with the superintendent is incredibly complex and,
and fragile.
And how do I get boards
and superintendents to agree that
they should invest the time in their relationship in a,
in a professional governance capacity?
Um, so I'm not concerned about my
bandwidth, my team's bandwidth.
We, we got plenty of bandwidth.
I'm, I'm more concerned with how do we, how do we change,
how do we get the, you know, education to change?
It's not getting any better. It's getting more challenging.
And, um, I just, I think we need to change things.
We wanna see a different outcome. Thank you.
And I think it starts with, it start,
and literally it starts with the board and superintendent.
And so how do we build
that relationship on a foundation of trust?
Mm-hmm. Um,
and I don't have the answer to it, it's just, you know,
but that's, that's what I'm thinking about. Thank
You. Other questions?
Uh, member Richardson.
Um, the proposal indicates that, uh,
zeal will match the price of any other search warrant,
but you, sorry, indicates that.
Uh, and so at the end of the fees on fees on the fees,
um, sorry, I'm a lawyer.
I, I call for comparable services.
That's kind of a big, a big one for me. Um, I think I put
The word comparable services though. Yeah.
Did you did say comparable. Yeah, comparable.
Doing a lot of work there. You know, I mean,
cost is a concern for us as a board.
Yeah. Um, you, you're compelling,
your presentation is compelling,
and your services are really, um, you know,
I'm a fan, but, but the, but,
but there is a sticker shock thing going on for me, which,
um, you know, so I don't know if there's ne you know,
if there's negotiation that, that, that, you know, if
that's a possibility, um, I mean, you have
that disclaimer there for a reason, so,
you know. Yeah. Yeah.
Well, I mean, what, what I would say is we are,
I would love to, if we were offered the opportunity,
I'd love to be able to negotiate with you in a way
that you're gonna feel like you're getting the value
and you're getting the service you need.
Mm-hmm. Um, we, we don't do things like,
and I think you'd, if you started going, if you went
with another firm and they mentioned like 175 an hour Yeah.
That can add up. And, you know, they're doing four meetings.
We're doing a week's worth of meetings. Yep.
So like, I think it comes out to about 40, 46 hours
or something like mm-hmm.
Just in hours community engagement.
So I think, I think we offer exceptional value,
even at our full price for what you get.
Of course. But, but I understand the reality
and the, so yeah, let's, I mean, like, let's find a way to,
if we are, if we are the selected firm, let's find a way
to make it work for all of us.
And I'm open to that conversation. Um,
Thank you. Thank you, Jeff.
Yeah. Other specific questions to the pro,
uh, presentation?
Okay. Seeing none, uh, we're gonna have a discussion.
You're, you're welcome to sit here,
but you're also welcome to get in your car and head
Home. Yeah. I'm gonna head, I'm
gonna head
Home. Uh, uh, so thank
you very much.
Cry carefully, Jeff. Yes. Thank
You. Thank you. Thank you everybody.
Have a good night. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh,
so we are now to our point of deliberation
and just talking about our, our own, uh,
our own thoughts about any
of the presentations.
And, uh, if we're, if we're going
to make a decision tonight, then we would go into, uh,
a special meeting and we would call that to order.
So, um, who wants to begin talking?
Uh, member Dowling.
I, I have a, a quick process, quick question. Yep.
I, I'm wondering, um, should we,
or could we, um, talk briefly about the, the ALMA proposal?
We, we, we didn't receive a presentation from them,
but we did receive a written, we did, um, proposal, which,
um, I don't know how many board members were able to review
that, but, um, yeah, I'm just, I'm just wondering if we
should spend a minute talking about that,
because it, it seems like it can go ahead,
might not be right to just ignore it.
Um, well, um, I, I guess I would say, um,
as, as far as sticker shock, I, I was really, yeah, same.
Very sticker. Shocked by, by theirs. Um, oh, what was that?
It's an impressive proposal,
but I didn't find it so impressive to justify, um,
the enormous premium over the other proposals.
Yeah. So that's
The other thing I would say,
because I did have a conversation. Yeah.
It's just a copy of a project B.
What'd you say? That I'm waiting for you
to stop talking so that I can speak. Um, sorry,
We're just, just, just literally trying to point him
to a number on a page. Yeah,
No, that's what we're doing.
No, just, I just didn't wanna keep
speaking while you were talking.
Um, what I did speak with, uh,
the person from Alma,
and what I, what I would just add to what, uh,
member Dowling just said is that, uh,
it's a big sticker shock.
They are located in New York.
Uh, the majority of their work is, um,
is virtual. They
In Chicago, aren't they?
No, I thought it was Chicago. The way they were working.
They, they, they do have an office in Chicago,
but they've got an office in New York.
Oh, virtual, really? Virtual engagement.
Correct. With even with the board. Yeah.
So the majority of their, of their work. Yeah.
That's, uh, and their,
and their communication with the board is virtual.
So that for me is problematic
because I, it's just really hard for me personally,
when I'm not face to face with somebody.
Like, I just wanna, I want to talk to them, you know,
and I don't wanna be on a screen.
So, um,
Well, and I think for reasons, like we were kind
of digging into the community engagement aspect
of Yeah. With,
Um, they would do that, but they would do it virtually.
Yeah. Yeah. I think that would be, that would be
Tough also, you know, it's not necessarily better
to have more choices, you know, I think we have,
we saw three really interesting presentations tonight.
Yeah. Agree with a wide range of price options.
And, uh, we don't really need to look at one that's got,
that's already twice as much
as price's already too expensive, though attractive.
Mm-hmm. So I just feel like, you know, thank you.
Yeah. But I agree. I
Agree. Well, if I had to comment on
that, I think they're trying
to say, this is the max, you know,
they're just putting that out there. Nobody else did that.
Mm-hmm. But anyway. Okay.
But's, I don't like the Virtual party either,
Would you? Yeah.
Well, MSMA did say that their, their service, like
sort of the whole shebang tops out at about $8,000.
Yeah. But keeping in mind that their, their service is,
um, sort of, well, I don't know.
It's, yeah. It's less than what
Yeah.
And just, I mean, to, to put a point on it,
they even have kind of the hours expected amount of time
for each one of their items in the MSMA one,
and just the amount of time that he's describing
that they would put into it versus
what MSA is putting into it, is way more, way more, yeah.
Way like, yeah. Weeks and
Weeks. So, other comments.
Just, if I can, uh, if I can I
keep track of who wants to speak
and, uh, get people to just get
recognized, it would be great.
So, uh, people's thoughts, reactions to any one
of the proposals or, um,
Uh, member Rich,
I really liked the, uh, NSEC, uh, presentation
and his, uh, detailed oriented sort of presentation.
It felt like he knew what he was doing.
Um, my least favorite was Zeal.
'cause it seemed like there was a lot of data.
They had an interesting sort of blind taste test.
You know, what do you feel like you're like,
and then we see our constituents,
oh, this is what we think we want.
That was kind of interesting.
But I don't know if it was worth the money,
but they kind of had some nice follow on things like,
you know, uh, trading the board, you know, I didn't see
that in the other, uh mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Legal things. Anyway, that's all I have.
I have my hand raised. Thank you. I'm Yes. Memorable.
I'm not in this, the line of sight here.
Yeah, that's all right. Um, so, um, I, uh,
uh, I actually like that guy too.
The, the, uh, the, uh, the, the Boston dude. Yeah.
I liked him. Um, super. I, yeah.
And I just wanna say, don't forget that, um, we are members
of Main School Management Association.
We get their mentoring. Yeah.
So that, so, so, so, you know, the attraction of, well,
like in addition, we're gonna, we could pay
for extra mentoring or Yeah.
This, this extra expensive expense, uh,
would include mentoring.
Don't forget that we already pay for mentoring.
We're already signed up for mentoring. Mm-hmm. Okay.
You know, I, and George might have, uh, this George, uh,
George e might have some, might have, uh, had had some of
that mentoring at some point in the, in your,
because you probably had a relationship
with Main School Management Association over the time
of your service at various districts.
So that's just, that's just out there
for me, something for us to consider.
Thank you. Yeah. And, um,
and this is, uh, um, I did like the, I mean, the zeal guy,
he had a lot of appeal
and, uh, that the, the, the kind of the detail thing.
But I, I will say I kind of liked, um,
and there, there's a tendency, I will say over the years,
I would observe as someone from Maine to always think
that the grass is greener on the other side,
and we couldn't possibly have what we need here.
Okay. There, there's just a tendency now, in,
in some cases that will be true.
The grass is indeed sometimes greener on the other side,
and what you need is not here.
So I'm not discounting that,
but I just, I do think we should keep in mind
that there is a tendency to, to think that,
that if we don't go beyond,
we can't possibly get the real quality
that's out there that's not here.
It's just a thing, you know,
that I've observed over the years.
Um, Rosemary, you may have noticed
that yourself having been been here for, you know, forever.
You know, forever. So, um, and so, uh, and,
and also I think
that there's a way in which when you're watching these
things, the first person, you know, it's like, that was
so long ago that we heard that guy talk.
Like, what did he even say?
So, so I feel like in some ways I need to go back and,
or like, if we could refresh on what the points are of each,
it might be a good idea.
Um, but Ms.
Shi, um, uh, um, was it Melendez from, uh, Massachusetts?
No. Melendez? No. Melendez, okay. Is okay. Dr.
Dusi. So he, um, he, uh, um, he did put it
to us, realistically, this is a lot of work
and you guys are gonna work really hard,
and these people are giving up part of their lives.
I like that part. I mean, it was very realistic
and it was very like, you know, we're gonna help you out,
but you guys are doing the,
you guys are actually doing the work.
Mm-hmm. So that was a part I liked.
On the other hand, I mean, in a way it was impressive.
He just stood up there and talked to us. He knows his stuff.
On the other hand, he just doesn have that little folder,
and you couldn't see from here.
But I could see this is just an adorable little thing in his
little, uh, you know, his little like, uh,
resume portfolio type of thing.
He had it had a calculator in it. I'm just gonna say, wow.
Guy knows how to, the guy
knows how to take care of his stuff.
Uh, member Smith.
Um, I think the way that I'm looking at it is I think, uh,
MSMA is gonna provide us that mentorship
that I really honestly would prefer that kind
of main centric, uh, context specific mentorship
that I would want from someone like MSMA rather than,
you know, someone from outta state or from New York
or whatever.
Um, because obviously I think context is crucially
important, um, what I see between NSEC
and MSA and Zeal is the level of support
that we're gonna get as a board mm-hmm.
Is different between each three of these.
And the main difference between NASDAQ
and Zeal is, you know, in Ns eq, I think he was very honest
that a lot of that work is gonna be ours, which can be good
and can be bad in the ways that, you know,
we're a new board, we're just getting to know each other.
It might be very difficult for us as a group to do all of
that work together to decide on this liaison,
to decide on the committee that's gonna be
included in the screening process.
And it creates a lot of points
for potential tension in a way that Zeal, I think,
is gonna do a lot of that work for us with people
who are very qualified to do that work, who have done a lot
of these kind of searches, who have seen
what districts look across the country,
and can probably identify ones that are similar to ours.
Um, and can, can kind of hold, hold us through that process,
um, in a way that I think would be in, in a way
that he talked about it as a way for our board together
to come together to build that consensus.
Mm-hmm. You know? Um,
and so it feels to me like it'll be more of a participatory
or a kind of coming together process
that would be really helpful for us.
I, I have a question. Yeah. I'm gonna comment. Hold on.
Uh, did you, did you wanna
Speak? Um, I,
I mean, Tyler, I, I, I agree
with everything you said.
I think that, um, I mean, I'll just say it.
I'm not interested in pursuing M-S-M-A-I, I think that, um,
I just think our, I think our district
and our needs are just bigger for what they can,
how they can support us right now.
Um, and it was a little like loosey goosey,
like you can customize it,
and it was very much like, well, whatever you want.
And it, and it was like, no, we actually need
some real kind of direction here.
Um, I mean, what are we paying for then?
Really, you know, um, the, I mean,
the thing that I like about Zeal is the time
and effort that we would, um, put into
that leadership profile.
And I think there that, that's gonna pay off dividends,
like putting that work, doing that work together.
It's gonna be, it, it really will be kind
of a strategic guiding document for us to have as a board.
And I think it, um,
it's an investment in ourselves and our,
and our community in terms of, um, I I, you know, I,
and I thought it was compelling
that it is the board's decision,
and I think it does, to Tyler's point, remove a lot of kind
of pain points as to who's in, who's out,
and which members of the community are in
and, and which aren't.
And, um, you know, this is our job.
This is one of the three responsibilities that we have.
And, um,
I know I personally really wanna be involved in the
selection and, um,
and I think that we all have a unique perspective
to offer to the decision.
Um, I, I, I just got a sense that this liaison with the nas,
nasdaq, I keep wanting to say, you know,
and Claire, Claire said something earlier tonight, like, oh,
I was part of the first selection of the superintendent.
But as these things kind of go, like somebody's part of,
you know, I'm not, I wasn't delegated with the
responsibilities committee, so I really didn't know
what was going on until the very end.
And, and, and I don't, I don't like that, um, with this kind
of a decision with how, um, kind of fragile we are
as a district right now.
I, I just think the seven of us
participating in the decision is really crucial.
But those are my, but then there's the cost. So
As you say, hold on.
Real, I'm going to you. Yeah.
Do you have something you wanna say? I do.
I'm going to every person first. Yeah.
But, but I ahead once. I did go once before. Okay.
So if Claire wants to again Yeah.
Thank you for running my meeting for me.
Uh, member
Holman, go ahead.
I will. Yeah, go ahead. Thank you very much.
It's just, just, just just, you know,
listening to what's going on here.
Um, so, uh, yeah. Well you mentioned cost.
I mean, you know, I don't know
what we have in our budget for, for this.
Is there anything in our budget for this? Nothing.
Like, if we have nothing in our budget, what, George?
Nothing. Uh, if we have nothing in our budget, nothing.
And I'm just saying, you know, I mean,
on a realistic perspective, like how many
of these ideas can we take that we got tonight
and squeeze into the 8,000 bucks?
Because I mean, we really might need to think about that.
I don't think, you know, I mean, that, you know,
he's not gonna go down by a lot.
He's not gonna, you know, he basically said,
you know, and I don't blame him.
They, they do, you know, I don't blame him.
You know, they, they, they're, they're gonna allocate a lot
of resources zealous, you know,
but I think we, I mean, you know, someone's gotta say,
you know, we gotta be, gotta be careful about cost.
We do. We have to. We can't just spend,
Hold on.
Member Dowling Do you wanna speak?
Yes, I will. Now. You're welcome.
Uh, if I were to rank the, uh, firms that have proposed
to us, I would rank
Zeal first, NS, EQ second,
and MSMA third.
Uh, I'm not gonna rank Alma
because I think we just have
to rule them out for financial reasons. Say
You rank one more time, Zeal first ne Ns, EQ second
and MSMA third.
Uh, and so here are some of the reasons for that.
Um, zeal more than the other, uh, firms
seems to have a real focus on kind of the, the
science of human relationships as it applies to
superintendents and the, all the people of the community,
the school community, the staff, and so on.
And I, I think, I think we see more
and more how important that is
and how, how much that can make or break a situation.
Um, and,
and I'm not saying that, that NASDAQ doesn't, uh, understand
that, but it, it's, it's not their focus, uh, you know,
to the, to anywhere near the same extent that it is
with, with Zeal.
Um, you know, I, I thought Nasdaq has a good proposal,
and I very much appreciated, uh, his honesty.
And, and I liked that he said, uh, it's, it's, he,
he basically said that the, the speed, uh,
is gonna be limited by the board.
You know, if you can keep up with us, we can do it quickly,
but it's, it's, it'll depend on the, the capacity
and the avail, the availability of the school board.
And, and we have a diverse board where there are some folks
who, um, have a lot of availability,
and there are folks who have much less.
Um, but they, they all need, they all need
and deserve to have input.
And I think it sounds like that would be a little bit easier
to accomplish with Zeal, with them doing a bit more
of the heavy lifting so
that the board members would not have
to do quite as much of it.
Um, and you know, I, I don't really have anything
negative to say about the MSMA proposal, except that I,
I don't know that it meets our needs the way that the
Nsec and Zeal proposals would it.
I, it feels like there's more gaps there.
Um, and it would be kind of a, you know, doing
what we've done in the past
and hoping we get superior results this time, I'm not
so sure that would, that would work out.
So that's, that's where I am right now in terms of
how I'm feeling about the candidates
Board member Smith.
Yeah, I, I think that's really well put.
Um, especially about kind of board capacity.
And I think just to add a point to it,
I feel really comfortable about the particular people we're
gonna be passing that capacity off to in Zeal
that the mm-hmm.
Just looking at the, you know, the resumes of the people
who work there, the capacity of having four team members.
You know, NASDAQ is gonna have, you know, someone
who has a ton of experience as a superintendent,
but, uh, might not have the same kind of capacity as,
as this team that they're gonna put in there that knows,
honestly, I trust more than I trust myself about making
important decisions and understanding how schools work.
Um, so I, I think I agree that Zeal is
to me, far and away the best choice.
Um, I, the money is obviously a huge issue.
I also think this is the single most important decision
that you can make as a district.
Mm-hmm. And so, if you're gonna have to spend eight,
10,000 more dollars in a way that gets us really,
you know, not just the superintendent and the process,
but the, the understanding of the community
and the, the, the kind of building that community profile,
I think is gonna do wonders for us as a board, as like going
through that process together.
Um, so I look at that as, as equal value
as finding the superintendent is us doing
that work together, of, of saying, okay,
what are our community members saying?
What do we think? You know, kind of leveraging all of that
and building cohesion as a,
as a board is gonna be really invaluable.
So I would agree that kind of, I similar rankings, um,
zeal Nasdaq and MSMA, but Zeal to me is far
and away the best choice.
Um, that's kind of where I stand.
Um, member Rich, I'd just like to share a data story.
When I worked, uh, in fueling, we would bury lines
and you have to sort of dress the wires in a particular way.
And we did a lot of surveying,
and we relied on our customer to make the decision.
A third of the people wanted it this way, a third
of the people wanted it that way, and a third didn't care.
So, which one do you listen to?
I think Zeal has low quality data.
When you look at Facebook style voting,
there were only 32 people who voted in that survey.
It wasn't a whole lot of participation,
but I did like the second half, like when they talked
to the board and worked with the board
and the entry thing, you know, that all made sense to me.
Oh, sorry. But, uh, the front, I think just
I question the use of it.
Uh, I, I'm, I'm gonna speak, uh,
because we're, we're split on this board.
Yeah. And, uh, so, and,
and if we're gonna go into session, we, we need to do that.
Okay. Um, I,
um, I, I thought Nsec did a great job,
and I was very pleased
and impressed with their presentation.
However, um, I, I think
what I liked most about Zeal, I liked a lot
of things about them, but one of, there were two key things
that were critical for me.
One was that, um,
the emphasis they put on the board making the decision.
Okay. And that, for me was really important
because, um, I, I think,
and I think it is the most important decision that we make,
and I think that, that even though that,
that they have other ways
that they're gonna reach the other constituent groups,
you know, that they're, and that they were gonna go out
and do it and make the contact.
And, uh, not everybody's gonna be happy with that,
but I think that it's one way
to get the entire board
doing all the interviewing and being,
Getting a Data, right.
And, and what he spoke about mostly getting the data was
about the, the unifying component of that, that it would
require us to have consensus.
And I think that's a really important piece for this board,
you know, to reach consensus.
And I, you know, I don't, with, with both
of the other proposals, you know, having
to have a search committee
and having to have an interview committee,
and then the board only seeing finalists, um,
is just not comfortable for me.
So the second thing that I really, uh,
appreciated about his presentation
was it is the, it was the only presentation
that had any diversity on the team.
Mm-hmm. I mean, it was the only presentation
that had two people of color.
Um, and I think, uh, I've, I,
I want to really involve her Gildo,
and I think there's some things.
So I, I, I would agree with what, um,
member Holman said that he's not gonna come down a lot.
And not only do I not blame him, I don't even see
how he could, you know, you're talking about
four people versus one person in both of the others.
So, if you were to take $8,000 by main school management
and multiply it by four, you, you get $32,000.
You know? So I, I think, um, and I,
and I, I, so I wanna be fair
to Zeal, and, you know, there are some additional costs.
I mean, it would probably be, yeah, around $30,000 for us.
And, you know, it's money we don't have, but, you know, but,
but that doesn't mean, you know, you,
you don't buy something because you really need it.
I mean, this is a need, it's not a want. Mm-hmm.
It's a need. And, um, so we're gonna have to figure out,
I would think we have to figure out the money component,
but, um,
but I ranked them similarly to, uh, what members Dowling
and Smith did, which was Zeal, nsda,
and main school management.
Uh, I, I agree.
Main school management offers some mentoring for us.
I'm, again, I'm not sure of the quality of that.
And I think that that's a decision we can make as we go,
as we go down the road.
Um, zeal already does at least a month of mentoring.
And, and I, and that's in the price. So I think both. Yeah.
You know, right. So we take that
and then we can decide are, you know,
are we gonna spend more money to continue with them?
Uh, and I think that that's something we don't know yet,
because we haven't worked with them.
But, um, but I, I just feel like, um,
yeah, I, I feel like it might be the mo more costly venture,
but, um, but for me, and,
and again, I wouldn't be uncomfortable with Nasdaq, I that,
but, but it was a totally different approach.
Um, and I really liked Zell's approach.
I really liked the idea of everybody being mm-hmm.
Even and equal and only bringing candidates to this board.
So, uh,
what we can do is if we wanna continue this discussion,
I'd like us to, um, end the workshop
and call to order a special meeting so
that we can make a decision about this
so I can contact whoever it is we're going to choose.
Um, so if we're ready to do that, I will, uh,
end our workshop meeting
and call us to order for a, um,
special meeting Wednesday, December 10th,
beginning at 8 25.
Yes. Adjoin, We don't really have to adjourn it,
but we can, um, if you wanna adjourn the
workshop, we can do that.
Motion to adjourn.
Moved by, uh, rich and seconded by Richardson.
Uh, all those in favor.
Okay. So we're gonna call to order
the meeting of December 10th at 8 25.
Uh, Dowling. Here. Feller Holman.
Here, Richardson. Here. Rich Smith Here.
Kabisa, Davison, and DeAngelos.
Okay. I'm not gonna do an opening statement,
and we're not gonna do a play of allegiance. I really
Wanted to stand, Uh, so consideration and action.
So we need a motion, uh, for consideration
and action to choose a particular agency, the name
to be given by whoever makes the motion
to assist the board in the superintendent's search.
So, uh, Smith
I Motion for zeal.
Okay. So, consideration and action.
To choose Zeal agency
to assist the board in the superintendent search.
It was moved by Smith and seconded by Richardson. Okay.
And now discussion, uh, member Smith.
Um, uh, all the things I said
before, I do want to affirm, um, you know,
George's concerns about the date of thought exchange.
I think you brought up really good points.
I think there's a lot that is concerning about
that kind of data collection.
I also think it's up to us to decide how to,
to wait it in our decision making.
Okay. Um, and I really like the fact that we're also going
to get, like you said, we'll,
we're gonna get comments, right.
That we can read and look at.
And we're also gonna get
that in-person community engagement, right?
Like, I see, like, you know, being able
to host sessions at Red Bank Community Center.
Exactly. Being able to host sessions at the library, right?
Like all these different places that we can, we can do
that work that Zeal can provide us.
So I won't, I won't say much more I've already said,
but, um, I feel, I feel good about, about picking them,
Uh, member Richardson.
Um, I agree. I, I'd like to explore, um,
whatever kind of negotiation they're willing to engage
with us on, on a, um, change in piece.
Um, and, you know, this is,
um, this is an investment in, in,
in the direction of, of our board.
And, and it's, it's, it's, it's exciting actually
to think that, that we get to spend this time together.
And I, well, and, and
No, I'm teasing you In, in this way.
Yes. I think it, I think it could be really, um, I think it,
I think it could be really healing
and we'll learn a lot from, for better or for worse.
But, um, but I do think that,
that I really trust the leadership that we'll get from Zeal
and the direction and,
and just the access to, um, a diverse group
of people to work with is, is, is pretty appealing.
Other comments? Member Holman.
I just think we're gonna be overspending.
And I, I think that we could, a lot
of the things we wanna do there,
there's no reason we couldn't,
we couldn't choose to do them.
And, uh, I mean, maybe our own time
and stuff, you know,
paying other people to do some of those things.
That's what we're basically doing.
Paying people to do stuff that we could do.
Uh, I see the advantage of that.
It's not like I don't see the advantage of it,
but, you know, considering our financial circumstances, uh,
I feel like, um, uh, yes, MSMA is kind
of build your own, but, you know, that's, you know,
DIY and that's how I live.
And, uh, you know, I mean, it's not, I just feel like,
I just feel like I, I feel like to a, I'm not
that I didn't like it, I liked that,
but you know, like anybody, I can fall for the bling
and I feel that there's a certain amount of bling there,
and I just, you know, I'm not sure
that in the end we're gonna feel like we got, what is it,
24 compared to eight?
Isn't that three times? It's
Probably 30, but, You know, 30.
I mean, it's a lot more, it's a lot, it's a lot more money.
It's a lot more money that we don't have, you know?
And people are so upset about what the, what the costs,
you know, what they're paying,
you know, taxpayers and everything.
I mean, it's just money we don't have.
So it does bother me, you know? It does bother me.
That's all. I mean, I, I, I, I get the appeal,
but I'm not sure, you know,
you don't have to have the fancy car.
You can really drive all,
all you want without the fancy car,
and it can be really great as long
as you buy a Toyota or Honda.
Remember Dowling, any comments?
Actually, if I, if, if I could, I, I, I'm wondering,
could board member Holman were, were you in, were you
Leaning more towards Nasdaq or MSMA?
I mean, I honestly, I just, I think that we, you know,
I think we can barely remember what the guy said.
And if you look at his thing, you know,
if you look back at it, it's like a lot of this, it's like,
okay, leadership profile development,
that's one of the big things they're offering.
I mean, it's like, it's not like
there's none of that in there.
It's just not, and I think that,
I mean, I don't have the study.
Someone could look, but, you know, it's like the last one.
You know, it's like, I mean, if he,
if this guy had gone first, I wonder
how good he would've sounded, you know,
I'm just saying it does matter, you know,
because, and it was attractive.
I'm not saying that, but I'm just not sure that
we are gonna get three times.
Was it Right, the value actually,
yeah. Does that's all
Member doling.
Nothing Further. Member Rich.
I'm wondering if anybody that of a
board can help me with this.
We're not really allowed to run a deficit.
We don't have deficit spending here. How can we afford this?
Someone help me with that,
because we just asked a, our sort of administrators
and leaders to cut back on non non-personnel spending.
And this is non-personnel spending.
Is that a double standard?
Well, I'm, I'm not sure
that you could call this non personnel. Yeah.
Well, it's, it's, I I mean, it's the only
Person, I'm gonna say non personnel,
because it's not related to the benefit
of a personnel person.
It's for us. Mm-hmm. And we're kind of a fixed asset.
Uh, I, I don't know whether you wanna speak to that, uh,
superintendent in whistle.
So, so the, the, uh, spending curtailment, uh, is not
impacting personnel.
So it's non personnel curtailment,
non personnel related curtailment.
That's where that non personnel comes in.
Yeah. There would not be, I mean,
not anticipating necessarily, um,
a change in superintendent,
you wouldn't have it in the budget anyway.
Mm-hmm. So, I, I was just sort of joking
and trying to up there, Uh,
got too late to say, to say, we have zero.
Yeah, we do have zero.
But the difference between the prices
that you're talking are, you want me to Yeah.
Give you a sentence.
Um, you know, my sense is if, if
you are, um, first off, you know, I calculated
that you would likely be spending more like $35,000 on zeal.
Um, it looks, it looks to me,
don't forget, people are traveling.
They're coming. If they're coming up here,
they're going to be staying over.
You're gonna have hotel, you're gonna have meals.
Um, so all of those are expenses that you should anticipate.
And I would expect that it would be more of
around three 5,000.
Um, just, just at FYI
or one man, I always say one man's opinion.
Um, if one of the things that you didn't like was that if,
uh, that, that, uh, the, that, um, Nestec,
I guess was, um, you,
um, say, which one was, are you thinking is too, uh,
board centric
or No, you're saying
that Nestec was not board centric enough.
You can have Nsec do a search
and you can say how you want the, who you want
to be on the committee, typically.
Um, it involves a couple,
a few members of the board,
or a couple of members of the board to start with.
And that's sort of that liaison part.
And then as you, as you get, as you get more serious,
it involves the rest of the board.
And then from there, you reach out
to the rest of the stakeholders.
So you can calculate that
and make that happen in any way that you would like.
Um, so what they were,
I think the board centric one, which is Zeal,
was almost exclusively with the board.
And really perhaps that's, that's not typical.
It's typical to start with the board and then, and then,
and then as, as you get further into the process,
it's the board is making this decision.
So they need to, they need to be the ones
to be pretty much focused on getting that finalist group.
And then you can open things up to other people
to be involved in that in the, uh, interviews
or additional interviews
or whatever of those, um, of, of the finalists.
Because you could have as many as four or five finalists.
Um, I,
The month of mentoring is really not much of anybody.
There's only so many meetings you can do.
There's only so much you can do within a month.
So while that is of value, it's a very
little value, um, what you're actually getting.
So,
yeah, I, so I just wanted to clear those things up
because I, I think that the numbers are,
are looking a little bit different.
Um, and the one, the one thing that, uh,
the chair, uh, said that she didn't like was, um, what
that was that someone said they didn't like
or liked better zeal because it was more word centric.
You can do that yourself.
That's a more typical way to do it.
Those are the only things that I heard
that you should consider.
The other thing is actually another thing, um,
due diligence is part of this in terms of your spending.
And someone should at least talk to a, um, a,
a some, a reference.
And if you're looking at mm-hmm.
Two, two of them, then you should look at
Yeah. A reference from them.
You have a motion on the floor. So a member Richardson,
Um,
I, okay, in terms of, in terms
of cost, we are in the situation we are in,
because we had a superintendent who neglected
to pay attention to details and our finances.
I feel very strongly about that.
And I don't want us to have
to pick the least expensive option here
because of, of some of that.
That is, that just, you know, that's just gonna keep us,
I feel like it's just gonna keep us stuck in a situ
and perpetuate a situation that
I think we are in crisis triage mode,
and we need to be thinking about like the, you know, 10,
20 years down the road, not like, what's, not,
who are we gonna plug in to the superintendent role
for next year, for the next however many years?
You know? Um, I
I, I don't know if I now need to
consider amending my second,
but I do think we need to be, I do think we need to ask for,
we need to counter zeal,
and we need to try to get that number down.
He's open to it. Um, I think we can tell 'em
what Nasdaq, nas, NASDAQ, whatever is willing,
what their quote was and say,
this is their quote, what can you do?
I mean, that I, so I, I, I think,
I think, I think it's really hard.
Um, I, I as much objectively I want zeal,
I want that to work out.
But, um, but I think it's hard.
I mean, we do need to think about the financial, like what,
what are, what is the proposal that we're accepting?
And I also, I also don't think that it could,
I I think we could say, you know, we, we can only have one
of you travel up here.
You know, we're on a tight budget.
I mean, I, I, I negotiate these things all the time.
Like that, that's, that, that we don't, I think we can,
we can put some boundaries around kind of the,
the expen the project, the expenses that are,
we are not defined.
I also think that we could do our own background checks.
I don't think we need to spend $3,000 on that.
I assume we have that the district has, I mean, I, I,
I mean, I know I, I, I,
I know you guys are doing background checks on me
as a volunteer, so we have some
service that we're using for that.
I think there's, there are ways to, um, kind
of bring down the cost.
So I think it's hard to say, let's all go, you know,
to do a vote if we don't really know what the fin the,
if the financial picture
potentially could change for the better
Member Smith.
Um, I think a couple things I'll say,
cost wise, I, I, I think everything
that everybody has said is totally valid.
I also think when we're talking about orders of magnitude,
you know, we're, we just talked about two nights ago,
the need to cut $400,000 from our
nutritional costs, right?
So they're
Not gonna be cut. That was not
Clear. No, no, totally.
But just that, those are the numbers
that we're talking, like the
magnitude that we're talking about.
And the, the difference here, you know,
is real obviously $20,000, whatever,
$30,000, whatever it may be.
Um, but what I see is the value.
Um, and I appreciate, you know,
superintendent making the point
that one month is really very minimal in terms of value.
Um, I think thought exchange
and some of the things that, that, uh, they're providing
that nec and the others can provide.
I think Claire was absolutely right that there's a lot
of bells and whistles here,
but what I see is the real true value is the four people
with what I would argue is significant experience in
the places that we want, that perhaps NASDAQ doesn't have.
And I would argue NASDAQ doesn't have, uh,
and those four people supporting us
and doing a lot of this facilitation in a way that Nasdaq,
uh, can't and won't be able to do.
So that's where I see the main value.
And we can, you know, argue about whether that is the value
that, that, you know, that, that up price
that the upcharge is.
Um, but I see that as, as invaluable as, as something
that we're just, we absolutely need in this process if we're
gonna get the right person in the role,
and we're gonna get our, them
and our board kind of together in this position of trust
where we can move forward as a, as a district.
So, um, that would just be my full throated endorsement,
um, for Zeal.
And with also the recognition
that there's maybe some negotiating that needs to happen
to try to get that prices as low as we can.
Uh, I will just say that, um, I agree with everything
that board member Smith just said.
Um, I, right now,
the motion is to approve Zeal.
It doesn't have any contingency.
I mean, I'm happy to talk with Jeff
and talk about how much, uh, that can be reduced,
but I think what we have to decide is the,
the quality of what they're going
to give costs this much money.
Like, that's what it costs.
So if we want
to save some money potentially on background checks, um,
and that, that number, I mean, no, that's,
that's not included.
We don't have to sign off on that.
Uh, we can decide that at some later time.
And, uh, you know, we might be down to two finalists and,
and, uh, zeal could say, well, that's only gonna cost you,
you know, $400 each.
I, I, I don't know, you know, we can decide at that point,
but I think if we're going to,
the only place I can see that it's reasonable
to talk about saving money is, uh, on
bias training and any of those issues that where we can use
Hermenes, Gildo to, uh, Paolo to do work with this board.
Um, but I think the other things that Zeal brings
to the table, the least of which is not
the unifying of this board, which I think is really key.
I think it's really key.
And I think if we come together as a board
in coming to unanimous consent on mm-hmm.
Choosing a superintendent, that
could just be huge for this body.
And, uh, for me, that makes it worth every penny.
And I think, you know, whether we're talking
28,000
or 32,000, whatever it is, it, uh, it's not
that I'm blase about the idea of spending money,
but, uh,
but to, to, to reinforce
what board member Smith said, um, I, I think it's,
I think it's minor compared to
what we're gonna be up against this is,
this is not gonna be the make
or break for us in this, in this district.
That's not gonna be,
but if we choose to what member Richardson said,
if we choose the wrong person, yeah,
it's gonna cost us a lot more than $30,000 in the long run.
And we've, and I,
and I don't think we can afford to do that,
and don't think we can afford to do that.
So, um, you know, again, I, I'm willing
to have some conversation with Jeff,
but I just don't want to reduce the services to the point
where, well, we might as well have gone with another choice,
you know, because we've narrowed it down so much
that we're just not even, we're not even getting
what we're saying we want.
So I, uh, uh, you know, I,
I'm in favor of going ahead with the motion as it stands
and, uh,
and just having the chair have a conversation with Jeff
and doing the best that's possible, um,
around the financial component.
But, um, but not have that be the deciding factor.
Okay. That, that's just
where I am. Uh, member Holman.
Yes. Um, although I, I did say, see
that Member Rich also had had his hand
Up and, and member Rich.
So who's first?
Me or you? You, you had your hand up first.
Me first. I think You had your hand up for me. Okay.
You've helped me with the, the money thing. Thank you.
But vendor approvals,
we got this vendor who's essentially offering a service.
What's that about? You know, how do we know
that they're someone we wanna spend money with
and, you know, did, is there any,
any way we know they're a good vendor.
What's, what's that process?
Do you want to mm-hmm. I can certainly do that. Maybe
The board can help me understand this. I mean,
Could we Say, I mean, we can, we, there could be,
somebody could make an amendment to the motion to say
contingent upon positive, um,
reference check. Yeah,
I'd like to make a motion.
Okay. Uh, that's an amendment, not a motion.
A I'd like to amend an amend, amend to add, to add, uh,
that, um, contingent upon,
Um, I have a vendor approval process.
George, is there like some kind of, you can spend money
with somebody if something?
No, not for something like that. Okay. No. Okay.
So, uh, amendment made by Richardson
and seconded by Smith.
So, um, that says,
contingent upon, uh, contingent upon positive,
uh, reference check.
Mm-hmm. Contingent. Okay.
We'll say contingent upon the chair's
positive reference check.
Um, and I can call
at least two of those people. Okay. Um,
Thank you.
And, uh, does anybody want to speak
to the amendment now?
We're voting just on,
On the, to the amendment. I
Would like to, to the amendment.
Uh, member Holman, I think
That we should have more than one person call.
I think we should call all the references.
It's not that big of a deal, but I think, you know, we, we,
we, I mean, we have to be able to justify if, if it is
that this were to get passed, we have to have done
as much due diligence as we can
because this, this is money we don't have.
I can call all the reference checks, that's fine.
But I said, I think we should be more than one person.
Then you've gotta make an amendment to that effect. Okay.
Alright. Because that's not what it says, but,
Well, that's why I'm speaking to, okay.
So what, you're making an
amendment to the amendment.
Okay. Sure thing. Um, and what is it you want That,
That we, uh, that a couple of members
at least two be tasked with?
Yeah. Be a couple of members.
Be tasked with, uh, contacting all the
Members. Be specific.
Who do you want?
I don't care. I mean, we can
decide that, we can decide that amongst
Ourselves. We, we gotta decide
this in the motion.
'cause we're gonna do that. Okay.
So you need to name somebody.
If you're gonna make a motion, I'll do it with you to Amen.
Okay. You happy to do it with the rose, rosemary?
So, um, unless
You wanna do it, Claire.
No, thanks. Okay. I mean, I will, I I will do it as needed.
Okay. But if, if you want
Okay. Richardson and
gi AngelList to
do reference checks
on all references,
and we can make that. All right. So
I have a comment on the, on, on the whole thing.
Yeah. So the other thing I would say is, you know, I mean,
I do think the idea of having consensus is excellent
and that that's that we, that we,
that was something that we should definitely,
You're speaking on the amendment to the amendment?
No, I'm speaking checking. That's
What you're, what should we talk about the,
talk about the, the, okay.
We gotta get to that. We're, we're not there. Okay.
So we're on the amendment to the amendment.
The reference is the amendment to the amendment.
The amendment to the amendment is that DeAngelo
and Richardson do reference checks on all references
for zeal
Motion.
All those in favor of that motion?
Is there any further discussion? Okay.
All those in favor of that motion. This
Is, this is just this question.
Okay. Just the amendment to the amendment. Okay.
So that passes.
Understand unanimously, we're back to the main motion
because the second amendment is gone.
Okay. I mean, the First Amendment is gone.
So we're back to the main motion, which is consideration
and action to choose zeal agency
to assist the board in the superintendent's search
contingent upon DeAngelo
and Richardson doing all reference checks for zeal.
So now that main motion Holman.
Alright, thank you. Um, so, uh,
I believe we have the resources here
to work towards acting out a consensus.
I just think that a lot of these things we can do.
We don't need to hire the most expensive firm in order
to have the benefit of using consensus as a way
to decide on who we choose.
These are not the only people in the world
could who could help us with that.
I mean, the only thing that they offer, I think
that there's, that we can't do is that they, that couple
of their consultants are people of color, which is good.
The other hand, we can't,
we have people within our community who fit that bill
who could be invited on onto this committee.
So I'm just saying that, you know, we don't have
to have all the bells and whistles.
A lot of those things we could, we could make sure we get.
Anyway.
Other comments? The made motion, um, member Smith.
Yeah, I, I just think that
that's a misrepresentation of the value.
These, it's not just that they're people of color,
so they bring decades in fact, that
to me is not really important.
It's that they bring decades of experience in this very,
this very job that we're asking them to do.
Mm-hmm. And they have that experience in places
where they have, will have similar student bodies,
similar challenges, similar problems,
and different challenges.
Just the range of experience that they bring that we cannot
find in our community.
We can't find it with any of the other vendors.
And, and I think that they, uh, that
that is where the value is.
Yep. Yes.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Just, I just wanna underscore what what was just said.
I, I, you know, I think we're, we're hiring experts
to help us find the, the best, the best candidates for,
for the job with, with our input on what
that job entails.
And, you know, I think that that's, that's money well spent.
The other thing that I would say is this room is empty
tonight, right?
Like, we publicized this.
I went to the city council meeting
and spoke during public audience of the citizens
in an effort to bring out people.
There was a, there was a meeting in this room right prior
to our coming, and no one stayed.
I invited everybody on the city council.
I invited the public to no one came. So, yeah, come on.
He's superintendent. Uh, and Whistle is here.
But, um, so I think if, if,
if that's, you know, if that's the attitude of the public,
then we need to make the best decision we can make.
Um, because we're the only people sitting in this room.
So, um, I, I support the main motion.
Any further discussion on the main motion? Okay.
The motion is consideration
and action to choose Zeal agency
to assist the board in the superintendent search contingent
upon Richardson and DeAngelo
to do reference checks on all references.
All those in favor of the main motion.
And opposed, okay, so opposed.
Hold on. Here is
Holman and Rich.
And support
is DeAngelo, Dowling, Richardson, and Smith.
So the motion passes.
Uh, I will meet with, um, member Richardson
and just split up that list and, uh, do that.
Does anybody have any other board communications
that they wanna make tonight? Did
Did we get an update from Daniel,
like as to why he wasn't here
Tonight? Yeah, he was out of
town. Oh, okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
He was not able to be here. Too bad.
Yeah. I'd like to make a comment.
Uh, thank you all for such a good conversation.
You know, I, I could really see the value in Zeal.
It's just, I ultimately just,
I need a little more time. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. It's tough. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you for that member rush. Yes. Thank you.
I, I would make a similar comment.
I, I mean, they are attractive.
I don't think, I mean, I, but I just feel, yeah. I just feel
Like, yeah.
I need a motion to adjourn. Move by Richardson.
And seconded by Rich. Rich.
All those in favor of adjourn.
Unanimous. Unanimous. Okay.